




This etext was produced by Normal Wolcott.





Ten Days that Shook the World

by John Reed




[Redactor's Note: This document uses the ISO 8891-1 Latin1 character
set (Windows). The book is composed of text, footnotes, and appendices.
The footnotes are included at the end of each chapter, while the
Appendix No. and Section are referred to in the text in parentheses,
the Appendices following the book text. Liberal use is made of italics,
and these have been indicated by bracketing italic text with the
underscore character "_".  Line length is 70-72 characters. A number of
graphics occur in the text, these are referred to by number as
"Graphic", etc. The Figures themselves are in a separate file. To
facilitate conversion to a word-processing format, an attempt has been
made to end each line with a space.

Graphics: There are 17 graphic figures in the text. These are indicated
by a reference to the page number in the original book. These figures
are available elsewhere (www.geocities.com/norm_90) where images of the
pages involved are available in tiff or pdf format. These are--
page 33 46      49      96      104     166     184     205
        224     227     251     254     276     279     281
        287     354

Epilogue: The original book of this text had a number of newspaper
clipings from the 1920's and 1930's included. Most of these relate to
the violent deaths encountered by those playing a part in this book.
Others reveal that Eisenstein made a film of "Ten Days". Stalin, who is
not mentioned in the book, suppressed the work. Louise Bryant,
mentioned in the text, was married to John Reed, and after his death
married William Bullitt in 1923 (divorced 1930) and died in Paris in
1936 at age 41. Mr. Bullitt was the first ambassador to Russia in the
Roosevelt administration, and later to France. Harvard University
accepted a commissioned portrait of Reed in 1935 from a group of his
classmates and hung it in Adams House, site of the boarding house where
Reed lived at Harvard. ]

                     Ten Days That Shook the World

                            by John Reed

                         Table of Contents

                Preface.

                Notes and Explanations.

                Chapter 1. Background.

                Chapter 2. The Coming Storm.

                Chapter 3. On the Eve.

                Chapter 4. The Fall of the Provisional Government.

                Chapter 5. Plunging Ahead.

                Chapter 6. The Committee for Salvation.

                Chapter 7. The Revolutionary Front.

                Chapter 8. Counter-Revolution.

                Chapter 9. Victory.

                Chapter 10. Moscow.

                Chapter 11. The Conquest of Power.

                Chapter 12. The Peasants’ Congress.

                Appendices I - XII


                             Preface

THIS book is a slice of intensified history—history as I saw it. It
does not pretend to be anything but a detailed account of the November
Revolution, when the Bolsheviki, at the head of the workers and
soldiers, seized the state power of Russia and placed it in the hands
of the Soviets.

Naturally most of it deals with “Red Petrograd,” the capital and heart
of the insurrection. But the reader must realize that what took place
in Petrograd was almost exactly duplicated, with greater or lesser
intensity, at different intervals of time, all over Russia.

In this book, the first of several which I am writing, I must confine
myself to a chronicle of those events which I myself observed and
experienced, and those supported by reliable evidence; preceded by two
chapters briefly outlining the background and causes of the November
Revolution. I am aware that these two chapters make difficult reading,
but they are essential to an understanding of what follows.

Many questions will suggest themselves to the mind of the reader. What
is Bolshevism? What kind of a governmental structure did the Bolsheviki
set up? If the Bolsheviki championed the Constituent Assembly before
the November Revolution, why did they disperse it by force of arms
afterward? And if the bourgeoisie opposed the Constituent Assembly
until the danger of Bolshevism became apparent, why did they champion
it afterward?

These and many other questions cannot be answered here. In another
volume, “Kornilov to Brest-Litovsk,” I trace the course of the
Revolution up to and including the German  peace. There I explain the
origin and functions of the Revolutionary organisations, the evolution
of popular sentiment, the dissolution of the Constituent Assembly, the
structure of the Soviet state, and the course and outcome of the Brest-
Litovsk negotiations….

In considering the rise of the Bolsheviki it is necessary to understand
that Russian economic life and the Russian army were not disorganised
on November 7th, 1917, but many months before, as the logical result of
a process which began as far back as 1915. The corrupt reactionaries in
control of the Tsar’s Court deliberately undertook to wreck Russia in
order to make a separate peace with Germany. The lack of arms on the
front, which had caused the great retreat of the summer of 1915, the
lack of food in the army and in the great cities, the break-down of
manufactures and transportation in 1916—all these we know now were part
of a gigantic campaign of sabotage. This was halted just in time by the
March Revolution.

For the first few months of the new régime, in spite of the confusion
incident upon a great Revolution, when one hundred and sixty millions
of the world’s most oppressed peoples suddenly achieved liberty, both
the internal situation and the combative power of the army actually
improved.

But the “honeymoon” was short. The propertied classes wanted merely a
political revolution, which would take the power from the Tsar and give
it to them. They wanted Russia to be a constitutional Republic, like
France or the United States; or a constitutional Monarchy, like
England. On the other hand, the masses of the people wanted real
industrial and agrarian democracy.

William English Walling, in his book, “Russia’s Message,” an account of
the Revolution of 1905, describes very well the state of mind of the
Russian workers, who were later to support Bolshevism almost
unanimously:

They (the working people) saw it was possible that even under a free
Government, if it fell into the hands of other social classes, they
might still continue to starve….

The Russian workman is revolutionary, but he is neither violent,
dogmatic, nor unintelligent. He is ready for barricades, but he has
studied them, and alone of the workers of the world he has learned
about them from actual experience. He is ready and willing to fight his
oppressor, the capitalist class, to a finish. But he does not ignore
the existence of other classes. He merely asks that the other classes
take one side or the other in the bitter conflict that draws near….

They (the workers) were all agreed that our (American) political
institutions were preferable to their own, but they were not very
anxious to exchange one despot for another (i.e., the capitalist
class)….

The workingmen of Russia did not have themselves shot down, executed by
hundreds in Moscow, Riga and Odessa, imprisoned by thousands in every
Russian jail, and exiled to the deserts and the arctic regions, in
exchange for the doubtful privileges of the workingmen of Goldfields
and Cripple Creek….

And so developed in Russia, in the midst of a foreign war, the Social
Revolution on top of the Political Revolution, culminating in the
triumph of Bolshevism.

Mr. A. J. Sack, director in this country of the Russian Information
Bureau, which opposes the Soviet Government, has this to say in his
book, “The Birth of the Russian Democracy”: The Bolsheviks organised
their own cabinet, with Nicholas Lenine as Premier and Leon Trotsky—
Minister of Foreign Affairs. The inevitability of their coming into
power became evident almost immediately after the March Revolution. The
history of the Bolsheviki, after the Revolution, is a history of their
steady growth….

Foreigners, and Americans especially, frequently emphasise the
“ignorance” of the Russian workers. It is true they lacked the
political experience of the peoples of the West, but they were very
well trained in voluntary organisation. In 1917 there were more than
twelve million members of the Russian consumers’ Cooperative societies;
and the Soviets themselves are a wonderful demonstration of their
organising genius. Moreover, there is probably not a people in the
world so well educated in Socialist theory and its practical
application.

William English Walling thus characterises them:

The Russian working people are for the most part able to read and
write. For many years the country has been in such a disturbed
condition that they have had the advantage of leadership not only of
intelligent individuals in their midst, but of a large part of the
equally revolutionary educated class, who have turned to the working
people with their ideas for the political and social regeneration of
Russia….

Many writers explain their hostility to the Soviet Government by
arguing that the last phase of the Russian Revolution was simply a
struggle of the “respectable” elements against the brutal attacks of
Bolshevism. However, it was the propertied classes, who, when they
realised the growth in power of the popular revolutionary
organisations, undertook to destroy them and to halt the Revolution. To
this end the propertied classes finally resorted to desperate measures.
In order to wreck the Kerensky Ministry and the Soviets, transportation
was disorganised and internal troubles provoked; to crush the Factory-
Shop Committees, plants were shut down, and fuel and raw materials
diverted; to break the Army Committees at the front, capital punishment
was restored and military defeat connived at.

This was all excellent fuel for the Bolshevik fire. The Bolsheviki
retorted by preaching the class war, and by asserting the supremacy of
the Soviets.

Between these two extremes, with the other factions which whole-
heartedly or half-heartedly supported them, were the so-called
“moderate” Socialists, the Mensheviki and Socialist Revolutionaries,
and several smaller parties. These groups were also attacked by the
propertied classes, but their power of resistance was crippled by their
theories.

Roughly, the Mensheviki and Socialist Revolutionaries believed that
Russia was not economically ripe for a social revolution—that only a
_political_ revolution was possible. According to their interpretation,
the Russian masses were not educated enough to take over the power; any
attempt to do so would inevitably bring on a reaction, by means of
which some ruthless opportunist might restore the old régime. And so it
followed that when the “moderate” Socialists were forced to assume the
power, they were afraid to use it.

They believed that Russia must pass through the stages of political and
economic development known to Western Europe, and emerge at last, with
the rest of the world, into full-fledged Socialism. Naturally,
therefore, they agreed with the propertied classes that Russia must
first be a parliamentary state—though with some improvements on the
Western democracies. As a consequence, they insisted upon the
collaboration of the propertied classes in the Government.

From this it was an easy step to supporting them. The “moderate”
Socialists needed the bourgeoisie. But the bourgeoisie did not need the
“moderate” Socialists. So it resulted in the Socialist Ministers being
obliged to give way, little by little, on their entire program, while
the propertied classes grew more and more insistent.

And at the end, when the Bolsheviki upset the whole hollow compromise,
the Mensheviki and Socialist Revolutionaries found themselves fighting
on the side of the propertied classes…. In almost every country in the
world to-day the same phenomenon is visible.

Instead of being a destructive force, it seems to me that the
Bolsheviki were the only party in Russia with a constructive program
and the power to impose it on the country. If they had not succeeded to
the Government when they did, there is little doubt in my mind that the
armies of Imperial Germany would have been in Petrograd and Moscow in
December, and Russia would again be ridden by a Tsar….

It is still fashionable, after a whole year of the Soviet Government,
to speak of the Bolshevik insurrection as an “adventure.” Adventure it
was, and one of the most marvellous mankind ever embarked upon,
sweeping into history at the head of the toiling masses, and staking
everything on their vast and simple desires. Already the machinery had
been set up by which the land of the great estates could be distributed
among the peasants. The Factory-Shop Committees and the Trade Unions
were there to put into operation workers’ control of industry. In every
village, town, city, district and province there were Soviets of
Workers’, Soldiers’ and Peasants’ Deputies, prepared to assume the task
of local administration.

No matter what one thinks of Bolshevism, it is undeniable that the
Russian Revolution is one of the great events of human history, and the
rise of the Bolsheviki a phenomenon of world-wide importance. Just as
historians search the records for the minutest details of the story of
the Paris Commune, so they will want to know what happened in Petrograd
in November, 1917, the spirit which animated the people, and how the
leaders looked, talked and acted. It is with this in view that I have
written this book.

In the struggle my sympathies were not neutral. But in telling the
story of those great days I have tried to see events with the eye of a
conscientious reporter, interested in setting down the truth.
                                        J. R.
    New York, January 1st 1919.


                        Notes and Explanations

To the average reader the multiplicity of Russian
organisations-political groups, Committees and Central Committees,
Soviets, Dumas and Unions-will prove extremely confusing. For this
reason I am giving here a few brief definitions and explanations.

                        Political Parties

In the elections to the Constituent Assembly, there were seventeen
tickets in Petrograd, and in some of the provincial towns as many as
forty; but the following summary of the aims and composition of
political parties is limited to the groups and factions mentioned in
this book. Only the essence of their programmes and the general
character of their constituencies can be noticed....

  1. _Monarchists,_ of various shades, _Octobrists,_ etc. These
once-powerful factions no longer existed openly; they either worked
underground, or their members joined the _Cadets,_ as the _Cadets_
came by degrees to stand for their political programme.
Representatives in this book, Rodzianko, Shulgin.

  2. _Cadets._ So-called from the initials of its name,
Constitutional Democrats. Its official name is "Party of the People's
Freedom." Under the Tsar composed of Liberals from the propertied
classes, the _Cadets_ were the great party of _political_ reform,
roughly corresponding to the Progressive Party in America. When the
Revolution broke out in March, 1917, the _Cadets_ formed the first
Provisional Government. The _Cadet_ Ministry was overthrown in April
because it declared itself in favour of Allied imperialistic aims,
including the imperialistic aims of the Tsar's Government. As the
Revolution became more and more a _social economic_ Revolution, the
_Cadets_ grew more and more conservative. Its representatives in this
book are: Miliukov, Vinaver, Shatsky.

  2a. _Group of Public Men._ After the _Cadets_ had become unpopular
through their relations with the Kornilov counter-revolution, the
_Group of Public Men_ was formed in Moscow. Delegates from the _Group
of Public Men_ were given portfolios in the last Kerensky Cabinet.
The _Group_ declared itself non-partisan, although its intellectual
leaders were men like Rodzianko and Shulgin. It was composed of the
more "modern" bankers, merchants and manufacturers, who were
intelligent enough to realise that the Soviets must be fought by
their own weapon-economic organisation. Typical of the _Group:_
Lianozov, Konovalov.

  3. _Populist Socialists,_ or _Trudoviki_ (Labour Group).
Numerically a small party, composed of cautious intellectuals, the
leaders of the Cooperative societies, and conservative peasants.
Professing to be Socialists, the _Populists_ really supported the
interests of the petty bourgeoisie-clerks, shopkeepers, etc. By
direct descent, inheritors of the compromising tradition of the
Labour Group in the Fourth Imperial Duma, which was composed largely
of peasant representatives. Kerensky was the leader of the
_Trudoviki_ in the Imperial Duma when the Revolution of March, 1917,
broke out. The _Populist Socialists_ are a nationalistic party. Their
representatives in this book are: Peshekhanov, Tchaikovsky.

  4. _Russian Social Democratic Labour Party._ Originally Marxian
Socialists. At a party congress held in 1903, the party split, on the
question of tactics, into two factions-the Majority (Bolshinstvo),
and the Minority (Menshinstvo). From this sprang the names
"Bolsheviki" and "Mensheviki"-"members of the majority" and "members
of the minority." These two wings became two separate parties, both
calling themselves "Russian Social Democratic Labour Party," and both
professing to be Marxians. Since the Revolution of 1905 the
Bolsheviki were really the minority, becoming again the majority in
September, 1917.

  a. _Mensheviki._ This party includes all shades of Socialists who
believe that society must progress by natural evolution toward
Socialism, and that the working-class must conquer political power
first. Also a nationalistic party. This was the party of the
Socialist intellectuals, which means: all the means of education
having been in the hands of the propertied classes, the intellectuals
instinctively reacted to their training, and took the side of the
propertied classes. Among their representatives in this book are:
Dan, Lieber, Tseretelli.

  b. _Mensheviki Internationalists._ The radical wing of the
_Mensheviki,_ internationalists and opposed to all coalition with the
propertied classes; yet unwilling to break loose from the
conservative Mensheviki, and opposed to the dictatorship of the
working-class advocated by the Bolsheviki. Trotzky was long a member
of this group. Among their leaders: Martov, Martinov.

  c. _Bolsheviki._ Now call themselves the _Communist Party,_ in
order to emphasise their complete separation from the tradition of
"moderate" or "parliamentary" Socialism, which dominates the
Mensheviki and the so-called Majority Socialists in all countries.
The _Bolsheviki_ proposed immediate proletarian insurrection, and
seizure of the reins of Government, in order to hasten the coming of
Socialism by forcibly taking over industry, land, natural resources
and financial institutions. This party expresses the desires chiefly
of the factory workers, but also of a large section of the poor
peasants. The name "Bolshevik" can _not_ be translated by
"Maximalist." The Maximalists are a separate group. (See paragraph
5b). Among the leaders: Lenin, Trotzky, Lunatcharsky.

  d. _United Social Democrats Internationalists._ Also called the
_Novaya Zhizn_ (New Life) group, from the name of the very
influential newspaper which was its organ. A little group of
intellectuals with a very small following among the working-class,
except the personal following of Maxim Gorky, its leader.
Intellectuals, with almost the same programme as the _Mensheviki
Internationalists,_ except that the _Novaya Zhizn_ group refused to
be tied to either of the two great factions. Opposed the Bolshevik
tactics, but remained in the Soviet Government. Other representatives
in this book: Avilov, Kramarov.

  e. _Yedinstvo._ A very small and dwindling group, composed almost
entirely of the personal following of Plekhanov, one of the pioneers
of the Russian Social Democratic movement in the 80's, and its
greatest theoretician. Now an old man, Plekhanov was extremely
patriotic, too conservative even for the Mensheviki. After the
Bolshevik _coup d'etat, Yedinstvo_ disappeared.

  5. _Socialist Revolutionary party._ Called _Essaires_ from the
initials of their name. Originally the revolutionary party of the
peasants, the party of the Fighting Organisations-the Terrorists.
After the March Revolution, it was joined by many who had never been
Socialists. At that time it stood for the abolition of private
property in land only, the owners to be compensated in some fashion.
Finally the increasing revolutionary feeling of peasants forced the
_Essaires_ to abandon the "compensation" clause, and led to the
younger and more fiery intellectuals breaking off from the main party
in the fall of 1917 and forming a new party, the _Left Socialist
Revolutionary party._ The _Essaires,_ who were afterward always
called by the radical groups _"Right Socialist Revolutionaries,"_
adopted the political attitude of the Mensheviki, and worked together
with them. They finally came to represent the wealthier peasants, the
intellectuals, and the politically uneducated populations of remote
rural districts. Among them there was, however, a wider difference of
shades of political and economic opinion than among the Mensheviki.
Among their leaders mentioned in these pages: Avksentiev, Gotz,
Kerensky, Tchernov, "Babuschka" Breshkovskaya.

  a. _Left Socialist Revolutionaries._ Although theoretically sharing
the Bolshevik programme of dictatorship of the working-class, at
first were reluctant to follow the ruthless Bolshevik tactics.
However, the _Left Socialist Revolutionaries_ remained in the Soviet
Government, sharing the Cabinet portfolios, especially that of
Agriculture. They withdrew from the Government several times, but
always returned. As the peasants left the ranks of the _Essaires_ in
increasing numbers, they joined the _Left Socialist Revolutionary
party,_ which became the great peasant party supporting the Soviet
Government, standing for confiscation without compensation of the
great landed estates, and their disposition by the peasants
themselves. Among the leaders: Spiridonova, Karelin, Kamkov,
Kalagayev.

  b. _Maximalists._ An off-shoot of the _Socialist Revolutionary
party_ in the Revolution of 1905, when it was a powerful peasant
movement, demanding the immediate application of the maximum
Socialist programme. Now an insignificant group of peasant
anarchists.

                        Parliamentary Procedure

Russian meetings and conventions are organised after the continental
model rather than our own. The first action is usually the election
of officers and the _presidium._

  The _presidium_ is a presiding committee, composed of
representatives of the groups and political factions represented in
the assembly, in proportion to their numbers. The _presidium_
arranges the Order of Business, and its members can be called upon by
the President to take the chair _pro tem._

  Each question (_vopros_) is stated in a general way and then
debated, and at the close of the debate resolutions are submitted by
the different factions, and each one voted on separately. The Order
of Business can be, and usually is, smashed to pieces in the first
half hour. On the plea of "emergency," which the crowd almost always
grants, anybody from the floor can get up and say anything on any
subject. The crowd controls the meeting, practically the only
functions of the speaker being to keep order by ringing a little
bell, and to recognise speakers. Almost all the real work of the
session is done in caucuses of the different groups and political
factions, which almost always cast their votes in a body and are
represented by floor-leaders. The result is, however, that at every
important new point, or vote, the session takes a recess to enable
the different groups and political factions to hold a caucus.

  The crowd is extremely noisy, cheering or heckling speakers,
over-riding the plans of the _presidium._ Among the customary cries
are: _"Prosim!_ Please! Go on!" _"Pravilno!"_ or _"Eto vierno!_
That's true! Right!" _"Do volno!_ Enough!" _"Doloi!_ Down with him!"
_"Posor!_ Shame!" and _"Teesche!_ Silence! Not so noisy!"

                        Popular Organisations

1. _Soviet._ The word _soviet_ means "council." Under the Tsar the
Imperial Council of State was called _Gosudarstvennyi Soviet._ Since
the Revolution, however, the term _Soviet_ has come to be associated
with a certain type of parliament elected by members of working-class
economic organisations-the Soviet of Workers', of Soldiers', or of
Peasants' Deputies. I have therefore limited the word to these
bodies, and wherever else it occurs I have translated it "Council."

  Besides the local _Soviets,_ elected in every city, town and
village of Russia-and in large cities, also Ward _(Raionny)
Soviets_-there are also the _oblastne_ or _gubiernsky_ (district or
provincial) _Soviets,_ and the Central Executive Committee of the
All-Russian _Soviets_ in the capital, called from its initials
_Tsay-ee-kah._ (See below, "Central Committees").

  Almost everywhere the _Soviets_ of Workers' and of Soldiers'
Deputies combined very soon after the March Revolution. In special
matters concerning their peculiar interests, however, the Workers'
and the Soldiers' Sections continued to meet separately. The
_Soviets_ of Peasants' Deputies did not join the other two until
after the Bolshevik _coup d'etat._ They, too, were organised like the
workers and soldiers, with an Executive Committee of the All-Russian
Peasants' _Soviets_ in the capital.

  2. _Trade Unions._ Although mostly industrial in form, the Russian
labour unions were still called Trade Unions, and at the time of the
Bolshevik Revolution had from three to four million members. These
Unions were also organised in an All-Russian body, a sort of Russian
Federation of Labour, which had its Central Executive Committee in
the capital.

  3. _Factory-Shop Committees._ These were spontaneous organisations
created in the factories by the workers in their attempt to control
industry, taking advantage of the administrative break-down incident
upon the Revolution. Their function was by revolutionary action to
take over and run the factories. The _Factory-Shop Committees_ also
had their All-Russian organisation, with a Central Committee at
Petrograd, which co-operated with the Trade Unions.

  4. _Dumas._ The word _duma_ means roughly "deliberative body." The
old Imperial Duma, which persisted six months after the Revolution,
in a democratised form, died a natural death in September, 1917. The
_City Duma_ referred to in this book was the reorganised Municipal
Council, often called "Municipal Self-Government." It was elected by
direct and secret ballot, and its only reason for failure to hold the
masses during the Bolshevik Revolution was the general decline in
influence of all purely _political_ representation in the fact of the
growing power of organisations based on _economic_ groups.

  5. _Zemstvos._ May be roughly translated "county councils." Under
the Tsar semi-political, semi-social bodies with very little
administrative power, developed and controlled largely by
intellectual Liberals among the land-owning classes. Their most
important function was education and social service among the
peasants. During the war the _Zemstvos_ gradually took over the
entire feeding and clothing of the Russian Army, as well as the
buying from foreign countries, and work among the soldiers generally
corresponding to the work of the American Y. M. C. A. at the Front.
After the March Revolution the _Zemstvos_ were democratized, with a
view to making them the organs of local government in the rural
districts. But like the _City Dumas,_ they could not compete with the
_Soviets._

  6. _Cooperatives._ These were the workers' and peasants' Consumers'
Cooperative societies, which had several million members all over
Russia before the Revolution. Founded by Liberals and "moderate"
Socialists, the Cooperative movement was not supported by the
revolutionary Socialist groups, because it was a substitute for the
complete transference of means of production and distribution into
the hands of the workers. After the March Revolution the
_Cooperatives_ spread rapidly, and were dominated by Populist
Socialists, Mensheviki and Socialist Revolutionaries, and acted as a
conservative political force until the Bolshevik Revolution. However,
it was the _Cooperatives_ which fed Russia when the old structure of
commerce and transportation collapsed.

  7. _Army Committees._ The _Army Committees_ were formed by the
soldiers at the front to combat the reactionary influence of the old
regime officers. Every company, regiment, brigade, division and corps
had its committee, over all of which was elected the _Army
Committee._ The _Central Army Committee_ cooperated with the General
Staff. The administrative break-down in the army incident upon the
Revolution threw upon the shoulders of the _Army Committees_ most of
the work of the Quartermaster's Department, and in some cases, even
the command of troops.

  8. _Fleet Committees._ The corresponding organisations in the Navy.

                        Central Committees

In the spring and summer of 1917, All-Russian conventions of every
sort of organisation were held at Petrograd. There were national
congresses of Workers', Soldiers' and Peasants' Soviets, Trade
Unions, Factory-Shop Committees, Army and Fleet Committees-besides
every branch of the military and naval service, Cooperatives,
Nationalities, etc. Each of these conventions elected a Central
Committee, or a Central Executive Committee, to guard its particular
interests at the seat of Government. As the Provisional Government
grew weaker, these Central Committees were forced to assume more and
more administrative powers.

  The most important Central Committees mentioned in this book are:

  _Union of Unions._ During the Revolution of 1905, Professor
Miliukov and other Liberals established unions of professional
men-doctors, lawyers, physicians, etc. These were united under one
central organisation, the _Union of Unions._ In 1905 the _Union of
Unions_ acted with the revolutionary democracy; in 1917, however, the
_Union of Unions_ opposed the Bolshevik uprising, and united the
Government employees who went on strike against the authority of the
Soviets.

  _Tsay-ee-kah._ All-Russian Central Executive Committee of the
Soviets of Workers' and Soldiers' Deputies. So called from the
initials of its name.

  _Tsentroflot._ "Centre-Fleet"-the Central Fleet Committee.

  _Vikzhel._ All-Russian Central Committee of the Railway Workers'
Union. So called from the initials of its name.

                        Other Organisations

_Red Guards._ The armed factory workers of Russia. The _Red Guards_
were first formed during the Revolution of 1905, and sprang into
existence again in the days of March, 1917, when a force was needed
to keep order in the city. At that time they were armed, and all
efforts of the Provisional Government to disarm them were more or
less unsuccessful. At every great crisis in the Revolution the _Red
Guards_ appeared on the streets, untrained and undisciplined, but
full of Revolutionary zeal.

  _White Guards._ Bourgeois volunteers, who emerged in the last
stages of the Revolution, to defend private property from the
Bolshevik attempt to abolish it. A great many of them were University
students.

  _Tekhintsi._ The so-called "Savage Division" in the army, made up
of Mohametan tribesmen from Central Asia, and personally devoted to
General Kornilov. The _Tekhintsi_ were noted for their blind
obedience and their savage cruelty in warfare.

  _Death Battalions._ Or _Shock Battalions._ The Women's Battalion is
known to the world as the _Death Battalion,_ but there were many
_Death Battalions_ composed of men. These were formed in the summer
of 1917 by Kerensky, for the purpose of strengthening the discipline
and combative fire of the army by heroic example. The _Death
Battalions_ were composed mostly of intense young patriots. These
came for the most part from among the sons of the propertied classes.

  _Union of Officers._ An organisation formed among the reactionary
officers in the army to combat politically the growing power of the
Army Committees.

  _Knights of St. George._ The Cross of St. George was awarded for
distinguished action in battle. Its holder automatically became a
_"Knight of St. George."_ The predominant influence in the
organisation was that of the supporters of the military idea.

  _Peasants' Union._ In 1905, the _Peasants' Union_ was a
revolutionary peasants' organisation. In 1917, however, it had become
the political expression of the more prosperous peasants, to fight
the growing power and revolutionary aims of the Soviets of Peasants'
Deputies.

                        Chronology and Spelling

I have adopted in this book our Calendar throughout, instead of the
former Russian Calendar, which was thirteen days earlier.

  In the spelling of Russian names and words, I have made no attempt
to follow any scientific rules for transliteration, but have tried to
give the spelling which would lead the English-speaking reader to the
simplest approximation of their pronunciation.

                        Sources

Much of the material in this book is from my own notes. I have also
relied, however, upon a heterogeneous file of several hundred
assorted Russian newspapers, covering almost every day of the time
described, of files of the English paper, the _Russian Daily News,_
and of the two French papers, _Journal de Russie_ and _Entente._ But
far more valuable than these is the _Bulletin de la Presse_ issued
daily by the French Information Bureau in Petrograd, which reports
all important happenings, speeches and the comment of the Russian
press. Of this I have an almost complete file from the spring of 1917
to the end of January, 1918.

  Besides the foregoing, I have in my possession almost every
proclamation, decree and announcement posted on the walls of
Petrograd from the middle of September, 1917, to the end of January,
1918. Also the official publication of all Government decrees and
orders, and the official Government publication of the secret
treaties and other documents discovered in the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs when the Bolsheviki took it over.

                  Ten Days That Shook The World

                              Chapter I

                             Background

TOWARD the end of September, 1917, an alien Professor of Sociology
visiting Russia came to see me in Petrograd. He had been informed by
business men and intellectuals that the Revolution was slowing down.
The Professor wrote an article about it, and then travelled around
the country, visiting factory towns and peasant communities-where, to
his astonishment, the Revolution seemed to be speeding up. Among the
wage-earners and the land-working people it was common to hear talk
of "all land to the peasants, all factories to the workers." If the
Professor had visited the front, he would have heard the whole Army
talking Peace....

The Professor was puzzled, but he need not have been; both
observations were correct. The property-owning classes were becoming
more conservative, the masses of the people more radical.

There was a feeling among business men and the _intelligentzia_
generally that the Revolution had gone quite far enough, and lasted
too long; that things should settle down. This sentiment was shared
by the dominant "moderate" Socialist groups, the _oborontsi_ (See
App. I, Sect. 1) Mensheviki and Socialist Revolutionaries, who
supported the Provisional Government of Kerensky.

On October 14th the official organ of the "moderate" Socialists said:

The drama of Revolution has two acts; the destruction of the old
régime and the creation of the new one. The first act has lasted long
enough. Now it is time to go on to the second, and to play it as
rapidly as possible. As a great revolutionist put it, "Let us hasten,
friends, to terminate the Revolution. He who makes it last too long
will not gather the fruits...."

Among the worker, soldier and peasant masses, however, there was a
stubborn feeling that the "first act" was not yet played out. On the
front the Army Committees were always running foul of officers who
could not get used to treating their men like human beings; in the
rear the Land Committees elected by the peasants were being jailed
for trying to carry out Government regulations concerning the land;
and the workmen (See App. I, Sect. 2) in the factories were fighting
black-lists and lockouts. Nay, furthermore, returning political
exiles were being excluded from the country as "undesirable"
citizens; and in some cases, men who returned from abroad to their
villages were prosecuted and imprisoned for revolutionary acts
committed in 1905.

To the multiform discontent of the people the "moderate" Socialists
had one answer: Wait for the Constituent Assembly, which is to meet
in December. But the masses were not satisfied with that. The
Constituent Assembly was all well and good; but there were certain
definite things for which the Russian Revolution had been made, and
for which the revolutionary martyrs rotted in their stark Brotherhood
Grave on Mars Field, that must be achieved Constituent Assembly or no
Constituent Assembly: Peace, Land, and Workers' Control of Industry.
The Constituent Assembly had been postponed and postponed-would
probably be postponed again, until the people were calm
enough-perhaps to modify their demands! At any rate, here were eight
months of the Revolution gone, and little enough to show for it....

Meanwhile the soldiers began to solve the peace question by simply
deserting, the peasants burned manor-houses and took over the great
estates, the workers sabotaged and struck.... Of course, as was
natural, the manufacturers, land-owners and army officers exerted all
their influence against any democratic compromise....

The policy of the Provisional Government alternated between
ineffective reforms and stern repressive measures. An edict from the
Socialist Minister of Labour ordered all the Workers' Committees
henceforth to meet only after working hours. Among the troops at the
front, "agitators" of opposition political parties were arrested,
radical newspapers closed down, and capital punishment applied-to
revolutionary propagandists. Attempts were made to disarm the Red
Guard. Cossacks were sent to keep order in the provinces....

These measures were supported by the "moderate" Socialists and their
leaders in the Ministry, who considered it necessary to cooperate
with the propertied classes. The people rapidly deserted them, and
went over to the Bolsheviki, who stood for Peace, Land, and Workers'
Control of Industry, and a Government of the working-class. In
September, 1917, matters reached a crisis. Against the overwhelming
sentiment of the country, Kerensky and the "moderate" Socialists
succeeded in establishing a Government of Coalition with the
propertied classes; and as a result, the Mensheviki and Socialist
Revolutionaries lost the confidence of the people forever.

An article in _Rabotchi Put_ (Workers' Way) about the middle of
October, entitled "The Socialist Ministers," expressed the feeling of
the masses of the people against the "moderate" Socialists:

Here is a list of their services.(See App. I, Sect. 3)

Tseretelli: disarmed the workmen with the assistance of General
Polovtsev, checkmated the revolutionary soldiers, and approved of
capital punishment in the army.

Skobeliev: commenced by trying to tax the capitalists 100% of their
profits, and finished-and finished by an attempt to dissolve the
Workers' Committees in the shops and factories.

Avksentiev: put several hundred peasants in prison, members of the
Land Committees, and suppressed dozens of workers' and soldiers'
newspapers.

Tchernov: signed the "Imperial" manifest, ordering the dissolution of
the Finnish Diet.

Savinkov: concluded an open alliance with General Kornilov. If this
saviour of the country was not able to betray Petrograd, it was due
to reasons over which he had no control.

Zarudny: with the sanction of Alexinsky and Kerensky, put some of the
best workers of the Revolution, soldiers and sailors, in prison.

Nikitin: acted as a vulgar policeman against the Railway Workers.

Kerensky: it is better not to say anything about him. The list of his
services is too long....

A Congress of delegates of the Baltic Fleet, at Helsingfors, passed a
resolution which began as follows:

We demand the immediate removal from the ranks of the Provisional
Government of the "Socialist," the political adventurer-Kerensky, as
one who is scandalising and ruining the great Revolution, and with it
the revolutionary masses, by his shameless political blackmail on
behalf of the bourgeoisie....

The direct result of all this was the rise of the Bolsheviki....

Since March, 1917, when the roaring torrents of workmen and soldiers
beating upon the Tauride Palace compelled the reluctant Imperial Duma
to assume the supreme power in Russia, it was the masses of the
people, workers, soldiers and peasants, which forced every change in
the course of the Revolution. They hurled the Miliukov Ministry down;
it was their Soviet which proclaimed to the world the Russian peace
terms-"No annexations, no indemnities, and the right of
self-determination of peoples"; and again, in July, it was the
spontaneous rising of the unorganised proletariat which once more
stormed the Tauride Palace, to demand that the Soviets take over the
Government of Russia.

The Bolsheviki, then a small political sect, put themselves at the
head of the movement. As a result of the disastrous failure of the
rising, public opinion turned against them, and their leaderless
hordes slunk back into the Viborg Quarter, which is Petrograd's _St.
Antoine._ Then followed a savage hunt of the Bolsheviki; hundreds
were imprisoned, among them Trotzky, Madame Kollontai and Kameniev;
Lenin and Zinoviev went into hiding, fugitives from justice; the
Bolshevik papers were suppressed. Provocators and reactionaries
raised the cry that the Bolsheviki were German agents, until people
all over the world believed it.

But the Provisional Government found itself unable to substantiate
its accusations; the documents proving pro-German conspiracy were
discovered to be forgeries; [*] and one by one the Bolsheviki were
[*Part of the famous "Sisson Documents"]
released from prison without trial, on nominal or no bail-until only
six remained. The impotence and indecision of the ever-changing
Provisional Government was an argument nobody could refute. The
Bolsheviki raised again the slogan so dear to the masses, "All Power
to the Soviets!"-and they were not merely self-seeking, for at that
time the majority of the Soviets was "moderate" Socialist, their
bitter enemy.

But more potent still, they took the crude, simple desires of the
workers, soldiers and peasants, and from them built their immediate
programme. And so, while the _oborontsi_ Mensheviki and Socialist
Revolutionaries involved themselves in compromise with the
bourgeoisie, the Bolsheviki rapidly captured the Russian masses. In
July they were hunted and despised; by September the metropolitan
workmen, the sailors of the Baltic Fleet, and the soldiers, had been
won almost entirely to their cause. The September municipal elections
in the large cities (See App. I, Sect. 4) were significant; only 18
per cent of the returns were Menshevik and Socialist Revolutionary,
against more than 70 per cent in June....

There remains a phenomenon which puzzled foreign observers: the fact
that the Central Executive Committees of the Soviets, the Central
Army and Fleet Committees, [*] and the Central Committees of some of
[*See Notes and Explanations.]
the Unions-notably, the Post and Telegraph Workers and the Railway
Workers-opposed the Bolsheviki with the utmost violence. These
Central Committees had all been elected in the middle of the summer,
or even before, when the Mensheviki and Socialist Revolutionaries had
an enormous following; and they delayed or prevented any new
elections. Thus, according to the constitution of the Soviets of
Workers' and Soldiers' Deputies, the All-Russian Congress _should
have been called in September;_ but the _Tsay-ee-kah_ [*] would not
[*See Notes and Explanations.]
call the meeting, on the ground that the Constituent Assembly was
only two months away, at which time, they hinted, the Soviets would
abdicate. Meanwhile, one by one, the Bolsheviki were winning in the
local Soviets all over the country, in the Union branches and the
ranks of the soldiers and sailors. The Peasants' Soviets remained
still conservative, because in the sluggish rural districts political
consciousness developed slowly, and the Socialist Revolutionary party
had been for a generation the party which had agitated among the
peasants.... But even among the peasants a revolutionary wing was
forming. It showed itself clearly in October, when the left wing of
the Socialist Revolutionaries split off, and formed a new political
faction, the Left Socialist Revolutionaries.

At the same time there were signs everywhere that the forces of
reaction were gaining confidence.(See App. I, Sect. 5) At the
Troitsky Farce theatre in Petrograd, for example, a burlesque called
_Sins of the Tsar_ was interrupted by a group of Monarchists, who
threatened to lynch the actors for "insulting the Emperor." Certain
newspapers began to sigh for a "Russian Napoleon." It was the usual
thing among bourgeois _intelligentzia_ to refer to the Soviets of
Workers' Deputies (Rabotchikh Deputatov) as _Sabatchikh_
Deputatov-Dogs' Deputies.

On October 15th I had a conversation with a great Russian capitalist,
Stepan Georgevitch Lianozov, known as the "Russian Rockefeller"-a
Cadet by political faith.

"Revolution," he said, "is a sickness. Sooner or later the foreign
powers must intervene here-as one would intervene to cure a sick
child, and teach it how to walk. Of course it would be more or less
improper, but the nations must realise the danger of Bolshevism in
their own countries-such contagious ideas as 'proletarian
dictatorship,' and 'world social revolution'... There is a chance that
this intervention may not be necessary. Transportation is
demoralised, the factories are closing down, and the Germans are
advancing. Starvation and defeat may bring the Russian people to
their senses...."

Mr. Lianozov was emphatic in his opinion that whatever happened, it
would be impossible for merchants and manufacturers to permit the
existence of the workers' Shop Committees, or to allow the workers
any share in the management of industry.

"As for the Bolsheviki, they will be done away with by one of two
methods. The Government can evacuate Petrograd, then a state of siege
declared, and the military commander of the district can deal with
these gentlemen without legal formalities.... _Or if, for example, the
Constituent Assembly manifests any Utopian tendencies, it can be
dispersed by force of arms...."_

Winter was coming on-the terrible Russian winter. I heard business
men speak of it so: "Winter was always Russia's best friend. Perhaps
now it will rid us of Revolution." On the freezing front miserable
armies continued to starve and die, without enthusiasm. The railways
were breaking down, food lessening, factories closing. The desperate
masses cried out that the bourgeoisie was sabotaging the life of the
people, causing defeat on the Front. Riga had been surrendered just
after General Kornilov said publicly, "Must we pay with Riga the
price of bringing the country to a sense of its duty?" [*]
[* See "Kornilov to Brest-Litvosk" by John Reed. Boni and Liveright
N.Y., 1919]

To Americans it is incredible that the class war should develop to
such a pitch. But I have personally met officers on the Northern
Front who frankly preferred military disaster to cooperation with the
Soldiers' Committees. The secretary of the Petrograd branch of the
Cadet party told me that the break-down of the country's economic
life was part of a campaign to discredit the Revolution. An Allied
diplomat, whose name I promised not to mention, confirmed this from
his own knowledge. I know of certain coal-mines near Kharkov which
were fired and flooded by their owners, of textile factories at
Moscow whose engineers put the machinery out of order when they left,
of railroad officials caught by the workers in the act of crippling
locomotives....

A large section of the propertied classes preferred the Germans to
the Revolution-even to the Provisional Government-and didn't hesitate
to say so. In the Russian household where I lived, the subject of
conversation at the dinner table was almost invariably the coming of
the Germans, bringing "law and order."... One evening I spent at the
house of a Moscow merchant; during tea we asked the eleven people at
the table whether they preferred "Wilhelm or the Bolsheviki." The
vote was ten to one for Wilhelm...

The speculators took advantage of the universal disorganisation to
pile up fortunes, and to spend them in fantastic revelry or the
corruption of Government officials. Foodstuffs and fuel were hoarded,
or secretly sent out of the country to Sweden. In the first four
months of the Revolution, for example, the reserve food-supplies were
almost openly looted from the great Municipal warehouses of
Petrograd, until the two-years' provision of grain had fallen to less
than enough to feed the city for one month.... According to the
official report of the last Minister of Supplies in the Provisional
Government, coffee was bought wholesale in Vladivostok for two rubles
a pound, and the consumer in Petrograd paid thirteen. In all the
stores of the large cities were tons of food and clothing; but only
the rich could buy them.

In a provincial town I knew a merchant family turned
speculator_-maradior_ (bandit, ghoul) the Russians call it. The three
sons had bribed their way out of military service. One gambled in
foodstuffs. Another sold illegal gold from the Lena mines to
mysterious parties in Finland. The third owned a controlling interest
in a chocolate factory, which supplied the local Cooperative
societies-on condition that the Cooperatives furnished him everything
he needed. And so, while the masses of the people got a quarter pound
of black bread on their bread cards, he had an abundance of white
bread, sugar, tea, candy, cake and butter.... Yet when the soldiers at
the front could no longer fight from cold, hunger and exhaustion, how
indignantly did this family scream "Cowards!"-how "ashamed" they were
"to be Russians"... When finally the Bolsheviki found and requisitioned
vast hoarded stores of provisions, what "Robbers" they were.

Beneath all this external rottenness moved the old-time Dark Forces,
unchanged since the fall of Nicholas the Second, secret still and
very active. The agents of the notorious _Okhrana_ still functioned,
for and against the Tsar, for and against Kerensky-whoever would
pay.... In the darkness, underground organisations of all sorts, such
as the Black Hundreds, were busy attempting to restore reaction in
some form or other.

In this atmosphere of corruption, of monstrous half-truths, one clear
note sounded day after day, the deepening chorus of the Bolsheviki,
"All Power to the Soviets! All power to the direct representatives of
millions on millions of common workers, soldiers, peasants. Land,
bread, an end to the senseless war, an end to secret diplomacy,
speculation, treachery.... The Revolution is in danger, and with it the
cause of the people all over the world!"

The struggle between the proletariat and the middle class, between
the Soviets and the Government, which had begun in the first March
days, was about to culminate. Having at one bound leaped from the
Middle Ages into the twentieth century, Russia showed the startled
world two systems of Revolution-the political and the social-in
mortal combat.

What a revelation of the vitality of the Russian Revolution, after
all these months of starvation and disillusionment! The bourgeoisie
should have better known its Russia. Not for a long time in Russia
will the "sickness" of Revolution have run its course....

Looking back, Russia before the November insurrection seems of
another age, almost incredibly conservative. So quickly did we adapt
ourselves to the newer, swifter life; just as Russian politics swung
bodily to the Left-until the Cadets were outlawed as "enemies of the
people," Kerensky became a "counter-revolutionist," the "middle"
Socialist leaders, Tseretelli, Dan, Lieber, Gotz and Avksentiev, were
too reactionary for their following, and men like Victor Tchernov,
and even Maxim Gorky, belonged to the Right Wing....

About the middle of December, 1917, a group of Socialist
Revolutionary leaders paid a private visit to Sir George Buchanan,
the British Ambassador, and implored him not to mention the fact that
they had been there, because they were "considered too far Right."

"And to think," said Sir George. "One year ago my Government
instructed me not to receive Miliukov, because he was so dangerously
Left!"

September and October are the worst months of the Russian
year-especially the Petrograd year. Under dull grey skies, in the
shortening days, the rain fell drenching, incessant. The mud
underfoot was deep, slippery and clinging, tracked everywhere by
heavy boots, and worse than usual because of the complete break-down
of the Municipal administration. Bitter damp winds rushed in from the
Gulf of Finland, and the chill fog rolled through the streets. At
night, for motives of economy as well as fear of Zeppelins, the
street-lights were few and far between; in private dwellings and
apartment-houses the electricity was turned on from six o'clock until
midnight, with candles forty cents apiece and little kerosene to be
had. It was dark from three in the afternoon to ten in the morning.
Robberies and housebreakings increased. In apartment houses the men
took turns at all-night guard duty, armed with loaded rifles. This
was under the Provisional Government.

Week by week food became scarcer. The daily allowance of bread fell
from a pound and a half to a pound, then three quarters, half, and a
quarter-pound. Toward the end there was a week without any bread at
all. Sugar one was entitled to at the rate of two pounds a month-if
one could get it at all, which was seldom. A bar of chocolate or a
pound of tasteless candy cost anywhere from seven to ten rubles-at
least a dollar. There was milk for about half the babies in the city;
most hotels and private houses never saw it for months. In the fruit
season apples and pears sold for a little less than a ruble apiece on
the street-corner....

For milk and bread and sugar and tobacco one had to stand in _queue_
long hours in the chill rain. Coming home from an all-night meeting I
have seen the _kvost_ (tail) beginning to form before dawn, mostly
women, some with babies in their arms.... Carlyle, in his _French
Revolution,_ has described the French people as distinguished above
all others by their faculty of standing in _queue._ Russia had
accustomed herself to the practice, begun in the reign of Nicholas
the Blessed as long ago as 1915, and from then continued
intermittently until the summer of 1917, when it settled down as the
regular order of things. Think of the poorly-clad people standing on
the iron-white streets of Petrograd whole days in the Russian winter!
I have listened in the bread-lines, hearing the bitter, acrid note of
discontent which from time to time burst up through the miraculous
goodnature of the Russian crowd....

Of course all the theatres were going every night, including Sundays.
Karsavina appeared in a new Ballet at the Marinsky, all dance-loving
Russia coming to see her. Shaliapin was singing. At the Alexandrinsky
they were reviving Meyerhold's production of Tolstoy's "Death of Ivan
the Terrible"; and at that performance I remember noticing a student
of the Imperial School of Pages, in his dress uniform, who stood up
correctly between the acts and faced the empty Imperial box, with its
eagles all erased.... The _Krivoye Zerkalo_ staged a sumptuous version
of Schnitzler's "Reigen."

Although the Hermitage and other picture galleries had been evacuated
to Moscow, there were weekly exhibitions of paintings. Hordes of the
female _intelligentzia_ went to hear lectures on Art, Literature and
the Easy Philosophies. It was a particularly active season for
Theosophists. And the Salvation Army, admitted to Russia for the
first time in history, plastered the walls with announcements of
gospel meetings, which amused and astounded Russian audiences....

As in all such times, the petty conventional life of the city went
on, ignoring the Revolution as much as possible. The poets made
verses-but not about the Revolution. The realistic painters painted
scenes from mediæval Russian history-anything but the Revolution.
Young ladies from the provinces came up to the capital to learn
French and cultivate their voices, and the gay young beautiful
officers wore their gold-trimmed crimson _bashliki_ and their
elaborate Caucasian swords around the hotel lobbies. The ladies of
the minor bureaucratic set took tea with each other in the afternoon,
carrying each her little gold or silver or jewelled sugar-box, and
half a loaf of bread in her muff, and wished that the Tsar were back,
or that the Germans would come, or anything that would solve the
servant problem.... The daughter of a friend of mine came home one
afternoon in hysterics because the woman street-car conductor had
called her "Comrade!"

All around them great Russia was in travail, bearing a new world. The
servants one used to treat like animals and pay next to nothing, were
getting independent. A pair of shoes cost more than a hundred rubles,
and as wages averaged about thirty-five rubles a month the servants
refused to stand in _queue_ and wear out their shoes. But more than
that. In the new Russia every man and woman could vote; there were
working-class newspapers, saying new and startling things; there were
the Soviets; and there were the Unions. The _izvoshtchiki_
(cab-drivers) had a Union; they were also represented in the
Petrograd Soviet. The waiters and hotel servants were organised, and
refused tips. On the walls of restaurants they put up signs which
read, "No tips taken here-" or, "Just because a man has to make his
living waiting on table is no reason to insult him by offering him a
tip!"

At the Front the soldiers fought out their fight with the officers,
and learned self-government through their committees. In the
factories those unique Russian organisations, the Factory-Shop
Committees, [*] gained experience and strength and a realisation of
[* See Notes and Explanations]
their historical mission by combat with the old order. All Russia was
learning to read, and _reading-_politics, economics, history-because
the people wanted to _know...._ In every city, in most towns, along the
Front, each political faction had its newspaper-sometimes several.
Hundreds of thousands of pamphlets were distributed by thousands of
organisations, and poured into the armies, the villages, the
factories, the streets. The thirst for education, so long thwarted,
burst with the Revolution into a frenzy of expression. From Smolny
Institute alone, the first six months, went out every day tons,
car-loads, train-loads of literature, saturating the land. Russia
absorbed reading matter like hot sand drinks water, insatiable. And
it was not fables, falsified history, diluted religion, and the cheap
fiction that corrupts-but social and economic theories, philosophy,
the works of Tolstoy, Gogol, and Gorky....

Then the Talk, beside which Carlyle's "flood of French speech" was a
mere trickle. Lectures, debates, speeches-in theatres, circuses,
school-houses, clubs, Soviet meeting-rooms, Union headquarters,
barracks.... Meetings in the trenches at the Front, in village squares,
factories.... What a marvellous sight to see Putilovsky Zavod (the
Putilov factory) pour out its forty thousand to listen to Social
Democrats, Socialist Revolutionaries, Anarchists, anybody, whatever
they had to say, as long as they would talk! For months in Petrograd,
and all over Russia, every street-corner was a public tribune. In
railway trains, street-cars, always the spurting up of impromptu
debate, everywhere....

And the All-Russian Conferences and Congresses, drawing together the
men of two continents-conventions of Soviets, of Cooperatives,
Zemstvos, [*] nationalities, priests, peasants, political parties; the
[* See Notes and Explanations]
Democratic Conference, the Moscow Conference, the Council of the
Russian Republic. There were always three or four conventions going
on in Petrograd. At every meeting, attempts to limit the time of
speakers voted down, and every man free to express the thought that
was in him....

We came down to the front of the Twelfth Army, back of Riga, where
gaunt and bootless men sickened in the mud of desperate trenches; and
when they saw us they started up, with their pinched faces and the
flesh showing blue through their torn clothing, demanding eagerly,
"Did you bring anything to _read?"_

What though the outward and visible signs of change were many, what
though the statue of Catharine the Great before the Alexandrinsky
Theatre bore a little red flag in its hand, and others-somewhat
faded-floated from all public buildings; and the Imperial monograms
and eagles were either torn down or covered up; and in place of the
fierce _gorodovoye_ (city police) a mild-mannered and unarmed citizen
militia patrolled the streets-still, there were many quaint
anachronisms.

For example, Peter the Great's _Tabel o Rangov-_Table of Ranks-which
he rivetted upon Russia with an iron hand, still held sway. Almost
everybody from the school-boy up wore his prescribed uniform, with
the insignia of the Emperor on button and shoulder-strap. Along about
five o'clock in the afternoon the streets were full of subdued old
gentlemen in uniform, with portfolios, going home from work in the
huge, barrack-like Ministries or Government institutions, calculating
perhaps how great a mortality among their superiors would advance
them to the coveted _tchin_ (rank) of Collegiate Assessor, or Privy
Councillor, with the prospect of retirement on a comfortable pension,
and possibly the Cross of St. Anne....

There is the story of Senator Sokolov, who in full tide of Revolution
came to a meeting of the Senate one day in civilian clothes, and was
not admitted because he did not wear the prescribed livery of the
Tsar's service!

It was against this background of a whole nation in ferment and
disintegration that the pageant of the Rising of the Russian Masses
unrolled....

                              Chapter II

                          The Coming Storm

IN September General Kornilov marched on Petrograd to make himself
military dictator of Russia. Behind him was suddenly revealed the
mailed fist of the bourgeoisie, boldly attempting to crush the
Revolution. Some of the Socialist Ministers were implicated; even
Kerensky was under suspicion. (See App. II, Sect. 1) Savinkov,
summoned to explain to the Central Committee of his party, the
Socialist Revolutionaries, refused and was expelled. Kornilov was
arrested by the Soldiers' Committees. Generals were dismissed,
Ministers suspended from their functions, and the Cabinet fell.

Kerensky tried to form a new Government, including the Cadets, party
of the bourgeoisie. His party, the Socialist Revolutionaries,
ordered him to exclude the Cadets. Kerensky declined to obey, and
threatened to resign from the Cabinet if the Socialists insisted.
However, popular feeling ran so high that for the moment he did not
dare oppose it, and a temporary Directorate of Five of the old
Ministers, with Kerensky at the head, assumed the power until the
question should be settled.

The Kornilov affair drew together all the Socialist
groups-"moderates" as well as revolutionists-in a passionate impulse
of self-defence. There must be no more Kornilovs. A new Government
must be created, responsible to the elements supporting the
Revolution. So the _Tsay-ee-kah_ invited the popular organisations
to send delegates to a Democratic Conference, which should meet at
Petrograd in September.

In the _Tsay-ee-kah_ three factions immediately appeared. The
Bolsheviki demanded that the All-Russian Congress of Soviets be
summoned, and that they take over the power. The "centre" Socialist
Revolutionaries, led by Tchernov, joined with the Left Socialist
Revolutionaries, led by Kamkov and Spiridonova, the Mensheviki
Internationalists under Martov, and the "centre" Mensheviki, [*]
[* See Notes and Explanations.]
represented by Bogdanov and Skobeliev, in demanding a purely
Socialist Government. Tseretelli, Dan and Lieber, at the head of the
right wing Mensheviki, and the right Socialist Revolutionaries under
Avksentiev and Gotz, insisted that the propertied classes must be
represented in the new Government.

Almost immediately the Bolsheviki won a majority in the Petrograd
Soviet, and the Soviets of Moscow, Kiev, Odessa and other cities
followed suit.

Alarmed, the Mensheviki and Socialist Revolutionaries in control of
the _Tsay-ee-kah_ decided that after all they feared the danger of
Kornilov less than the danger of Lenin. They revised the plan of
representation in the Democratic Conference, (See App. II, Sect. 2)
admitting more delegates from the Cooperative Societies and other
conservative bodies. Even this packed assembly at first voted for a
_Coalition Government without the Cadets._ Only Kerensky's open
threat of resignation, and the alarming cries of the "moderate"
Socialists that "the Republic is in danger" persuaded the
Conference, by a small majority, to declare in favour of the
principle of coalition with the bourgeoisie, and to sanction the
establishment of a sort of consultative Parliament, without any
legislative power, called the Provisional Council of the Russian
Republic. In the new Ministry the propertied classes practically
controlled, and in the Council of the Russian Republic they occupied
a disproportionate number of seats.

The fact is that the _Tsay-ee-kah_ no longer represented the rank
and file of the Soviets, and had illegally refused to call another
All-Russian Congress of Soviets, due in September. It had no
intention of calling this Congress or of allowing it to be called.
Its official organ, _Izviestia_ (News), began to hint that the
function of the Soviets was nearly at an end, (See App. II, Sect. 3)
and that they might soon be dissolved... At this time, too, the new
Government announced as part of its policy the liquidation of
"irresponsible organisations"-i.e. the Soviets.

The Bolsheviki responded by summoning the All-Russian Soviets to
meet at Petrograd on November 2, and take over the Government of
Russia. At the same time they withdrew from the Council of the
Russian Republic, stating that they would not participate in a
"Government of Treason to the People." (See App. II, Sect. 4)

The withdrawal of the Bolsheviki, however, did not bring
tranquillity to the ill-fated Council. The propertied classes, now
in a position of power, became arrogant. The Cadets declared that
the Government had no legal right to declare Russia a republic. They
demanded stern measures in the Army and Navy to destroy the
Soldiers' and Sailors' Committees, and denounced the Soviets. On the
other side of the chamber the Mensheviki Internationalists and the
Left Socialist Revolutionaries advocated immediate peace, land to
the peasants, and workers' control of industry-practically the
Bolshevik programme.

I heard Martov's speech in answer to the Cadets. Stooped over the
desk of the tribune like the mortally sick man he was, and speaking
in a voice so hoarse it could hardly be heard, he shook his finger
toward the right benches:

"You call us defeatists; but the real defeatists are those who wait
for a more propitious moment to conclude peace, insist upon
postponing peace until later, until nothing is left of the Russian
army, until Russia becomes the subject of bargaining between the
different imperialist groups.... You are trying to impose upon the
Russian people a policy dictated by the interests of the
bourgeoisie. The question of peace should be raised without delay....
You will see then that not in vain has been the work of those whom
you call German agents, of those Zimmerwaldists [*] who in all the
[* Members of the revoloutionary internationalist wing of the
Socialists of Europe, so-called because of their participation
in the International Conference held at Zimmerwald, Switzerland,
in 1915]
lands have prepared the awakening of the conscience of the
democratic masses...."

Between these two groups the Mensheviki and Socialist
Revolutionaries wavered, irresistibly forced to the left by the
pressure of the rising dissatisfaction of the masses. Deep hostility
divided the chamber into irreconcilable groups.

This was the situation when the long-awaited announcement of the
Allied Conference in Paris brought up the burning question of
foreign policy....

Theoretically all Socialist parties in Russia were in favour of the
earliest possible peace on democratic terms. As long ago as May,
1917, the Petrograd Soviet, then under control of the Mensheviki and
Socialist Revolutionaries,had proclaimed the famous Russian
peace-conditions. They had demanded that the Allies hold a
conference to discuss war-aims. This conference had been promised
for August; then postponed until September; then until October; and
now it was fixed for November 10th.

The Provisional Government suggested two representatives-General
Alexeyev, reactionary military man, and Terestchenko, Minister of
Foreign Affairs. The Soviets chose Skobeliev to speak for them and
drew up a manifesto, the famous _nakaz_- (See App. II, Sect. 5)
instructions. The Provisional Government  objected to Skobeliev and
his _nakaz;_ the Allied ambassadors protested and finally Bonar Law
in the British House of Commons, in answer to a question, responded
coldly, "As far as I know the Paris Conference will not discuss the
aims of the war at all, but only the methods of conducting it...."

At this the conservative Russian press was jubilant, and the
Bolsheviki cried, "See where the compromising tactics of the
Mensheviki and Socialist Revolutionaries have led them!"

Along a thousand miles of front the millions of men in Russia's
armies stirred like the sea rising, pouring into the capital their
hundreds upon hundreds of delegations, crying "Peace! Peace!"

I went across the river to the Cirque Moderne, to one of the great
popular meetings which occurred all over the city, more numerous
night after night. The bare, gloomy amphitheatre, lit by five tiny
lights hanging from a thin wire, was packed from the ring up the
steep sweep of grimy benches to the very roof-soldiers, sailors,
workmen, women, all listening as if their lives depended upon it. A
soldier was speaking-from the Five Hundred and Forty-eight Division,
wherever and whatever that was:

"Comrades," he cried, and there was real anguish in his drawn face
and despairing gestures. "The people at the top are always calling
upon us to sacrifice more, sacrifice more, while those who have
everything are left unmolested.

"We are at war with Germany. Would we invite German generals to
serve on our Staff? Well we're at war with the capitalists too, and
yet we invite them into our Government....

"The soldier says, 'Show me what I am fighting for. Is it
Constantinople, or is it free Russia? Is it the democracy, or is it
the capitalist plunderers? If you can prove to me that I am
defending the Revolution then I'll go out and fight without capital
punishment to force me.'

"When the land belongs to the peasants, and the factories to the
workers, and the power to the Soviets, then we'll know we have
something to fight for, and we'll fight for it!"

In the barracks, the factories, on the street-corners, end less
soldier speakers, all clamouring for an end to the war, declaring
that if the Government did not make an energetic effort to get
peace, the army would leave the trenches and go home.

The spokesman for the Eighth Army:

"We are weak, we have only a few men left in each company. They must
give us food and boots and reinforcements, or soon there will be
left only empty trenches. Peace or supplies... either let the
Government end the war or support the Army...."

For the Forty-sixth Siberian Artillery:

"The officers will not work with our Committees, they betray us to
the enemy, they apply the death penalty to our agitators; and the
counter-revolutionary Government supports them. We thought that the
Revolution would bring peace. But now the Government forbids us even
to talk of such things, and at the same time doesn't give us enough
food to live on, or enough ammunition to fight with...."

From Europe came rumours of peace at the expense of Russia. (See
App. II, Sect. 6)...

News of the treatment of Russian troops in France added to the
discontent. The First Brigade had tried to replace its officers with
Soldiers' Committees, like their comrades at home, and had refused
an order to go to Salonika, demanding to be sent to Russia. They had
been surrounded and starved, and then fired on by artillery, and
many killed. (See App. II, Sect. 7)...

On October 29th I went to the white-marble and crimson hall of the
Marinsky palace, where the Council of the Republic sat, to hear
Terestchenko's declaration of the Government's foreign policy,
awaited with such terrible anxiety by all the peace-thirsty and
exhausted land.

A tall, impeccably-dressed young man with a smooth face and high
cheek-bones, suavely reading his careful, non-committal speech. (See
App. II, Sect. 8) Nothing.... Only the same platitudes about crushing
German militarism with the help of the Allies-about the "state
interests" of Russia, about the "embarrassment" caused by
Skobeliev's _nakaz._ He ended with the key-note:

"Russia is a great power. Russia will remain a great power, whatever
happens. We must all defend her, we must show that we are defenders
of a great ideal, and children of a great power."

Nobody was satisfied. The reactionaries wanted a "strong"
imperialist policy; the democratic parties wanted an assurance that
the Government would press for peace.... I reproduce an editorial in
_Rabotchi i Soldat_ (Worker and Soldier), organ of the Bolshevik
Petrograd Soviet:

THE GOVERNMENT'S ANSWER TO THE TRENCHES

The most taciturn of our Ministers, Mr. Terestchenko, has actually
told the trenches the following:

1. We are closely united with our Allies. (Not with the peoples, but
with the Governments.)

2. There is no use for the democracy to discuss the possibility or
impossibility of a winter campaign. That will be decided by the
Governments of our Allies.

3. The 1st of July offensive was beneficial and a very happy affair.
(He did not mention the consequences.)

4. It is not true that our Allies do not care about us. The Minister
has in his possession very important declarations. (Declarations?
What about deeds? What about the behaviour of the British fleet?
(See App. II, Sect. 9) The parleying of the British king with exiled
counter-revolutionary General Gurko? The Minister did not mention
all this.)

5. The _nakaz_ to Skobeliev is bad; the Allies don't like it and the
Russian diplomats don't like it. In the Allied Conference we must
all 'speak one language.'

And is that all? That is all. What is the way out? The solution is,
faith in the Allies and in Terestchenko. When will peace come? When
the Allies permit.

That is how the Government replied to the trenches about peace!

Now in the background of Russian politics began to form the vague
outlines of a sinister power-the Cossacks. _Novaya Zhizn_ (New
Life), Gorky's paper, called attention to their activities:

At the beginning of the Revolution the Cossacks refused to shoot
down the people. When Kornilov marched on Petrograd they refused to
follow him. From passive loyalty to the Revolution the Cossacks have
passed to an active political offensive (against it). From the
back-ground of the Revolution they have suddenly advanced to the
front of the stage....

Kaledin, _ataman_ of the Don Cossacks, had been dismissed by the
Provisional Government for his complicity in the Kornilov affair. He
flatly refused to resign, and surrounded by three immense Cossack
armies lay at Novotcherkask, plotting and menacing. So great was his
power that the Government was forced to ignore his insubordination.
More than that, it was compelled formally to recognise the Council
of the Union of Cossack Armies, and to declare illegal the
newly-formed Cossack Section of the Soviets....

In the first part of October a Cossack delegation called upon
Kerensky, arrogantly insisting that the charges against Kaledin be
dropped, and reproaching the Minister-President for yielding to the
Soviets. Kerensky agreed to let Kaledin alone, and then is reported
to have said, "In the eyes of the Soviet leaders I am a despot and a
tyrant.... As for the Provisional Government, not only does it not
depend upon the Soviets, but it considers it regrettable that they
exist at all."

At the same time another Cossack mission called upon the British
ambassador, treating with him boldly as representatives of "the free
Cossack people."

In the Don something very like a Cossack Republic had been
established. The Kuban declared itself an independent Cossack State.
The Soviets of Rostov-on-Don and Yekaterinburg were dispersed by
armed Cossacks, and the headquarters of the Coal Miners' Union at
Kharkov raided. In all its manifestations the Cossack movement was
anti-Socialist and militaristic. Its leaders were nobles and great
land-owners, like Kaledin, Kornilov, Generals Dutov, Karaulov and
Bardizhe, and it was backed by the powerful merchants and bankers of
Moscow....

Old Russia was rapidly breaking up. In Ukraine, in Finland, Poland,
White Russia, the nationalist movements gathered strength and became
bolder. The local Governments, controlled by the propertied classes,
claimed autonomy, refusing to obey orders from Petrograd. At
Helsingfors the Finnish Senate declined to loan money to the
Provisional Government, declared Finland autonomous, and demanded
the withdrawal of Russian troops. The bourgeois Rada at Kiev
extended the boundaries of Ukraine until they included all the
richest agricultural lands of South Russia, as far east as the
Urals, and began the formation of a national army. Premier
Vinnitchenko hinted at a separate peace with Germany-and the
Provisional Government was helpless. Siberia, the Caucasus, demanded
separate Constituent Assemblies. And in all these countries there
was the beginning of a bitter struggle between the authorities and
the local Soviets of Workers' and Soldiers' Deputies....

Conditions were daily more chaotic. Hundreds of thousands of
soldiers were deserting the front and beginning to move in vast,
aimless tides over the face of the land. The peasants of Tambov and
Tver Governments, tired of waiting for the land, exasperated by the
repressive measures of the Government, were burning manor-houses and
massacring land-owners. Immense strikes and lock-outs convulsed
Moscow, Odessa and the coal-mines of the Don. Transportation was
paralysed; the army was starving and in the big cities there was no
bread.

The Government, torn between the democratic and reactionary
factions, could do nothing: when forced to act it always supported
the interests of the propertied classes. Cossacks were sent to
restore order among the peasants, to break the strikes. In Tashkent,
Government authorities suppressed the Soviet. In Petrograd the
Economic Council, established to rebuild the shattered economic life
of the country, came to a deadlock between the opposing forces of
capital and labour, and was dissolved by Kerensky. The old régime
military men, backed by Cadets, demanded that harsh measures be
adopted to restore discipline in the Army and the Navy. In vain
Admiral Verderevsky, the venerable Minister of Marine, and General
Verkhovsky, Minister of War, insisted that only a new, voluntary,
democratic discipline, based on cooperation with the soldiers' and
sailors' Committees, could save the army and navy. Their
recommendations were ignored.

The reactionaries seemed determined to provoke popular anger. The
trial of Kornilov was coming on. More and more openly the bourgeois
press defended him, speaking of him as "the great Russian patriot."
Burtzev's paper, _Obshtchee Dielo_ (Common Cause), called for a
dictatorship of Kornilov, Kaledin and Kerensky!

I had a talk with Burtzev one day in the press gallery of the
Council of the Republic. A small, stooped figure with a wrinkled
face, eyes near-sighted behind thick glasses, untidy hair and beard
streaked with grey.

"Mark my words, young man! What Russia needs is a Strong Man. We
should get our minds off the Revolution now and concentrate on the
Germans. Bunglers, bunglers, to defeat Kornilov; and back of the
bunglers are the German agents. Kornilov should have won...."

On the extreme right the organs of the scarcely-veiled Monarchists,
Purishkevitch's _Narodny Tribun_ (People's Tribune), _Novaya Rus_
(New Russia), and _Zhivoye Slovo_ (Living Word), openly advocated
the extermination of the revolutionary democracy....

On the 23rd of October occurred the naval battle with a German
squadron in the Gulf of Riga. On the pretext that Petrograd was in
danger, the Provisional Government drew up plans for evacuating the
capital. First the great munitions works were to go, distributed
widely throughout Russia; and then the Government itself was to move
to Moscow. Instantly the Bolsheviki began to cry out that the
Government was abandoning the Red Capital in order to weaken the
Revolution. Riga had been sold to the Germans; now Petrograd was
being betrayed!

The bourgeois press was joyful. "At Moscow," said the Cadet paper
_Ryetch_ (Speech), "the Government can pursue its work in a tranquil
atmosphere, without being interfered with by anarchists." Rodzianko,
leader of the right wing of the Cadet party, declared in _Utro
Rossii_ (The Morning of Russia) that the taking of Petrograd by the
Germans would be a blessing, because it would destroy the Soviets
and get rid of the revolutionary Baltic Fleet:

Petrograd is in danger (he wrote). I say to myself, "Let God take
care of Petrograd." They fear that if Petrograd is lost the central
revolutionary organisations will be destroyed. To that I answer that
I rejoice if all these organisations are destroyed; for they will
bring nothing but disaster upon Russia....

With the taking of Petrograd the Baltic Fleet will also be
destroyed.... But there will be nothing to regret; most of the
battleships are completely demoralised....

In the face of a storm of popular disapproval the plan of evacuation
was repudiated.

Meanwhile the Congress of Soviets loomed over Russia like a
thunder-cloud, shot through with lightnings. It was opposed, not
only by the Government but by all the "moderate" Socialists. The
Central Army and Fleet Committees, the Central Committees of some of
the Trade Unions, the Peasants' Soviets, but most of all the
_Tsay-ee-kah_ itself, spared no pains to prevent the meeting.
_Izviestia_ and _Golos Soldata_ (Voice of the Soldier), newspapers
founded by the Petrograd Soviet but now in the hands of the
_Tsay-ee-kah,_ fiercely assailed it, as did the entire artillery of
the Socialist Revolutionary party press, _Dielo Naroda_ (People's
Cause) and _Volia Naroda_ (People's Will).

Delegates were sent through the country, messages flashed by wire to
committees in charge of local Soviets, to Army Committees,
instructing them to halt or delay elections to the Congress. Solemn
public resolutions against the Congress, declarations that the
democracy was opposed to the meeting so near the date of the
Constituent Assembly, representatives from the Front, from the Union
of Zemstvos, the Peasants' Union, Union of Cossack Armies, Union of
Officers, Knights of St. George, Death Battalions, [*] protesting....
[*See Notes and Explanations.]
The Council of the Russian Republic was one chorus of disapproval.
The entire machinery set up by the Russian Revolution of March
functioned to block the Congress of Soviets....

On the other hand was the shapeless will of the proletariat-the
workmen, common soldiers and poor peasants. Many local Soviets were
already Bolshevik; then there were the organisations of the
industrial workers, the _Fabritchno-Zavodskiye Comitieti-_
Factory-Shop Committees; and the insurgent Army and Fleet
organisations. In some places the people, prevented from electing
their regular Soviet delegates, held rump meetings and chose one of
their number to go to Petrograd. In others they smashed the old
obstructionist committees and formed new ones. A ground-swell of
revolt heaved and cracked the crust which had been slowly hardening
on the surface of revolutionary fires dormant all those months. Only
an spontaneous mass-movement could bring about the All-Russian
Congress of Soviets....

Day after day the Bolshevik orators toured the barracks and
factories, violently denouncing "this Government of civil war." One
Sunday we went, on a top-heavy steam tram that lumbered through
oceans of mud, between stark factories and immense churches, to
_Obukhovsky Zavod,_ a Government munitions-plant out on the
Schlüsselburg Prospekt.

The meeting took place between the gaunt brick walls of a huge
unfinished building, ten thousand black-clothed men and women packed
around a scaffolding draped in red, people heaped on piles of lumber
and bricks, perched high upon shadowy girders, intent and
thunder-voiced. Through the dull, heavy sky now and again burst the
sun, flooding reddish light through the skeleton windows upon the
mass of simple faces upturned to us.

Lunatcharsky, a slight, student-like figure with the sensitive face
of an artist, was telling why the power must be taken by the
Soviets. Nothing else could guarantee the Revolution against its
enemies, who were deliberately ruining the country, ruining the
army, creating opportunities for a new Konilov.

A soldier from the Rumanian front, thin, tragical and fierce, cried,
"Comrades! We are starving at the front, we are stiff with cold. We
are dying for no reason. I ask the American comrades to carry word
to America, that the Russians will never give up their Revolution
until they die. We will hold the fort with all our strength until
the peoples of the world rise and help us! Tell the American workers
to rise and fight for the Social Revolution!"

Then came Petrovsky, slight, slow-voiced, implacable: "Now is the
time for deeds, not words. The economic situation is bad, but we
must get used to it. They are trying to starve us and freeze us.
They are trying to provoke us. But let them know that they can go
too far-that if they dare to lay their hands upon the organisations
of the proletariat we will sweep them away like scum from the face
of the earth!"

The Bolshevik press suddenly expanded. Besides the two party papers,
_Rabotchi Put_ and _Soldat_ (Soldier), there appeared a new paper
for the peasants, _Derevenskaya Byednota_ (Village Poorest), poured
out in a daily half-million edition; and on October 17th, _Rabotchi
i Soldat._ Its leading article summed up the Bolshevik point of view:

The fourth year's campaign will mean the annihilation of the army
and the country.... There is danger for the safety of Petrograd....
Counter-revolutionists rejoice in the people's misfortunes.... The
peasants brought to desperation come out in open rebellion; the
landlords and Government authorities massacre them with punitive
expeditions; factories and mines are closing down, workmen are
threatened with starvation.... The bourgeoisie and its Generals want
to restore a blind discipline in the army.... Supported by the
bourgeoisie, the Kornilovtsi are openly getting ready to break up
the meeting of the Constituent Assembly....

The Kerensky Government is against the people. He will destroy the
country.... This paper stands for the people and by the people-the
poor classes, workers, soldiers and peasants. The people can only be
saved by the completion of the Revolution... and for this purpose the
full power must be in the hands of the Soviets....

This paper advocates the following: All power to the Soviets-both in
the capital and in the provinces.

Immediate truce on all fronts. An honest peace between peoples.

Landlord estates-without compensation-to the peasants.

Workers' control over industrial production.

A faithfully and honestly elected Constituent Assembly.

It is interesting to reproduce here a passage from that same
paper-the organ of those Bolsheviki so well known to the world as
German agents:

The German kaiser, covered with the blood of millions of dead
people, wants to push his army against Petrograd. Let us call to the
German workmen, soldiers and peasants, who want peace not less than
we do, to... stand up against this damned war!

This can be done only by a revolutionary Government, which would
speak really for the workmen, soldiers and peasants of Russia, and
would appeal over the heads of the diplomats directly to the German
troops, fill the German trenches with proclamations in the German
language.... Our airmen would spread these proclamations all over
Germany....

In the Council of the Republic the gulf between the two sides of the
chamber deepened day by day.

"The propertied classes," cried Karelin, for the Left Socialist
Revolutionaries, "want to exploit the revolutionary machine of the
State to bind Russia to the war-chariot of the Allies! The
revolutionary parties are absolutely against this policy...."

Old Nicholas Tchaikovsky, representing the Populist Socialists,
spoke against giving the land to the peasants, and took the side of
the Cadets: "We must have immediately strong discipline in the
army.... Since the beginning of the war I have not ceased to insist
that it is a crime to undertake social and economic reforms in
war-time. We are committing that crime, and yet I am not the enemy
of these reforms, because I am a Socialist."

Cries from the Left, "We don't believe you!" Mighty applause from
the Right....

Adzhemov, for the Cadets, declared that there was no necessity to
tell the army what it was fighting for, since every soldier ought to
realise that the first task was to drive the enemy from Russian
territory.

Kerensky himself came twice, to plead passionately for national
unity, once bursting into tears at the end. The assembly heard him
coldly, interrupting with ironical remarks.

Smolny Institute, headquarters of the _Tsay-ee-kah_ and of the
Petrograd Soviet, lay miles out on the edge of the city, beside the
wide Neva. I went there on a street-car, moving snail-like with a
groaning noise through the cobbled, muddy streets, and jammed with
people. At the end of the line rose the graceful smoke-blue cupolas
of Smolny Convent outlined in dull gold, beautiful; and beside it
the great barracks like façade of Smolny Institute, two hundred
yards long and three lofty stories high, the Imperial arms carved
hugely in stone still insolent over the entrance....

Under the old régime a famous convent-school for the daughters of
the Russian nobility, patronised by the Tsarina herself, the
Institute had been taken over by the revolutionary organisations of
workers and soldiers. Within were more than a hundred huge rooms,
white and bare, on their doors enamelled plaques still informing the
passerby that within was "Ladies' Class-room Number 4" or "Teachers'
Bureau"; but over these hung crudely-lettered signs, evidence of the
vitality of the new order: "Central Committee of the Petrograd
Soviet" and _"Tsay-ee-kah"_ and "Bureau of Foreign Affairs"; "Union
of Socialist Soldiers," "Central Committee of the All-Russian Trade
Unions," "Factory-Shop Committees," "Central Army Committee"; and
the central offices and caucus-rooms of the political parties....

The long, vaulted corridors, lit by rare electric lights, were
thronged with hurrying shapes of soldiers and workmen, some bent
under the weight of huge bundles of newspapers, proclamations,
printed propaganda of all sorts. The sound of their heavy boots made
a deep and incessant thunder on the wooden floor.... Signs were posted
up everywhere: "Comrades! For the sake of your health, preserve
cleanliness!" Long tables stood at the head of the stairs on every
floor, and on the landings, heaped with pamphlets and the literature
of the different political parties, for sale....

The spacious, low-ceilinged refectory downstairs was still a
dining-room. For two rubles I bought a ticket entitling me to
dinner, and stood in line with a thousand others, waiting to get to
the long serving-tables, where twenty men and women were ladling
from immense cauldrons cabbage soup, hunks of meat and piles of
_kasha,_ slabs of black bread. Five kopeks paid for tea in a tin
cup. From a basket one grabbed a greasy wooden spoon.... The benches
along the wooden tables were packed with hungry proletarians,
wolfing their food, plotting, shouting rough jokes across the room....


[Graphic page-33 -- text of placard in russian, translation follows]

COMRADES
FOR THE SAKE OF YOUR HEALTH,
PRESERVE CLEANLINESS.

Upstairs was another eating-place, reserved for the _Tsay-ee-kah-_
though every one went there. Here could be had bread thickly
buttered and endless glasses of tea....

In the south wing on the second floor was the great hall of
meetings, the former ball-room of the Institute. A lofty white room
lighted by glazed-white chandeliers holding hundreds of ornate
electric bulbs, and divided by two rows of massive columns; at one
end a dais, flanked with two tall many-branched light standards, and
a gold frame behind, from which the Imperial portrait had been cut.
Here on festal occasions had been banked brilliant military and
ecclesiastical uniforms, a setting for Grand Duchesses....

Just across the hall outside was the office of the Credentials
Committee for the Congress of Soviets. I stood there watching the
new delegates come in-burly, bearded soldiers, workmen in black
blouses, a few long-haired peasants. The girl in charge-a member of
Plekhanov's _Yedinstvo_ [*] group-smiled contemptuously. "These are
[* See Notes and Explanations]
very different people from the delegates to the first _Siezd_
(Congress)," she remarked. "See how rough and ignorant they look!
The Dark People...." It was true; the depths of Russia had been
stirred, and it was the bottom which came uppermost now. The
Credentials Committee, appointed by the old _Tsay-ee-kah,_ was
challenging delegate after delegate, on the ground that they had
been illegally elected. Karakhan, member of the Bolshevik Central
Committee, simply grinned. "Never mind," he said, "When the time
comes we'll see that you get your seats...."

_Rabotchi i Soldat_ said:

The attention of delegates to the new All-Russian Congress is called
to attempts of certain members of the Organising Committee to break
up the Congress, by asserting that it will not take place, and that
delegates had better leave Petrograd.... Pay no attention to these
lies.... Great days are coming....

It was evident that a quorum would not come together by November 2,
so the opening of the Congress was postponed to the 7th. But the
whole country was now aroused; and the Mensheviki and Socialist
Revolutionaries, realising that they were defeated, suddenly changed
their tactics and began to wire frantically to their provincial
organisations to elect as many "moderate" Socialist delegates as
possible. At the same time the Executive Committee of the Peasants'
Soviets issued an emergency call for a Peasants' Congress, to meet
December 13th and offset whatever action the workers and soldiers
might take...

What would the Bolsheviki do? Rumours ran through the city that
there would be an armed "demonstration," a _vystuplennie_-"coming
out" of the workers and soldiers. The bourgeois and reactionary
press prophesied insurrection, and urged the Government to arrest
the Petrograd Soviet, or at least to prevent the meeting of the
Congress. Such sheets as _Novaya Rus_ advocated a general Bolshevik
massacre.

Gorky's paper, _Novaya Zhizn,_ agreed with the Bolsheviki that the
reactionaries were attempting to destroy the Revolution, and that if
necessary they must be resisted by force of arms; but all the
parties of the revolutionary democracy must present a united front.

As long as the democracy has not organised its principal forces, so
long as the resistance to its influence is still strong, there is no
advantage in passing to the attack. But if the hostile elements
appeal to force, then the revolutionary democracy should enter the
battle to seize the power, and it will be sustained by the most
profound strata of the people....

Gorky pointed out that both reactionary and Government newspapers
were inciting the Bolsheviki to violence. An insurrection, however,
would prepare the way for a new Kornilov. He urged the Bolsheviki to
deny the rumours. Potressov, in the Menshevik _Dien_ (Day),
published a sensational story, accompanied by a map, which professed
to reveal the secret Bolshevik plan of campaign.

As if by magic, the walls were covered with warnings, (See App. II,
Sect. 10) proclamations, appeals, from the Central Committees of the
"moderate" and conservative factions and the _Tsay-ee-kah,_
denouncing any "demonstrations," imploring the workers and soldiers
not to listen to agitators. For instance, this from the Military
Section of the Socialist Revolutionary party:

Again rumours are spreading around the town of an intended
_vystuplennie._ What is the source of these rumours? What
organisation authorises these agitators who preach insurrection? The
Bolsheviki, to a question addressed to them in the _Tsay-ee-kah,_
denied that they have anything to do with it.... But these rumours
themselves carry with them a great danger. It may easily happen
that, not taking into consideration the state of mind of the
majority of the workers, soldiers and peasants, individual hot-heads
will call out part of the workers and soldiers on the streets,
inciting them to an uprising.... In this fearful time through which
revolutionary Russia is passing, any insurrection can easily turn
into civil war, and there can result from it the destruction of all
organisations of the proletariat, built up with so much labour.... The
counter-revolutionary plotters are planning to take advantage of
this insurrection to destroy the Revolution, open the front to
Wilhelm, and wreck the Constituent Assembly.... Stick stubbornly to
your posts! Do not come out!

On October 28th, in the corridors of Smolny, I spoke with Kameniev,
a little man with a reddish pointed beard and Gallic gestures. He
was not at all sure that enough delegates would come. "If there _is_
a Congress," he said, "it will represent the overwhelming sentiment
of the people. If the majority is Bolshevik, as I think it will be,
we shall demand that the power be given to the Soviets, and the
Provisional Government must resign...."

Volodarsky, a tall, pale youth with glasses and a bad complexion,
was more definite. "The 'Lieber-Dans' and the other compromisers are
sabotaging the Congress. If they succeed in preventing its
meeting,-well, then we are realists enough not to depend on _that!"_

Under date of October 29th I find entered in my notebook the
following items culled from the newspapers of the day:

Moghilev (General Staff Headquarters). Concentration here of loyal
Guard Regiments, the Savage Division, Cossacks and Death Battalions.

The _yunkers_ of the Officers' Schools of Pavlovsk, Tsarskoye Selo
and Peterhof ordered by the Government to be ready to come to
Petrograd. Oranienbaum _yunkers_ arrive in the city.

Part of the Armoured Car Division of the Petrograd garrism stationed
in the Winter Palace.

Upon orders signed by Trotzky, several thousand rifles delivered by
the Government Arms Factory at Sestroretzk to delegates of the
Petrograd workmen.

At a meeting of the City Militia of the Lower Liteiny Quarter, a
resolution demanding that all power be given to the Soviets.

This is just a sample of the confused events of those feverish days,
when everybody knew that something was going to happen, but nobody
knew just what.

At a meeting of the Petrograd Soviet in Smolny, the night of October
30th, Trotzky branded the assertions of the bourgeois press that the
Soviet contemplated armed insurention as "an attempt of the
reactionaries to discredit and wreck the Congress of Soviets.... The
Petrograd Soviet," he declared, "had not ordered any _uystuplennie._
If it is necessary we shall do so, and we will be supported by the
Petrogruad garrison.... They (the Government) are preparing a
counter-revolution; and we shall answer with an offensive which will
be merciless and decisive."

It is true that the Petrograd Soviet had not ordered a
demonstration, but the Central Committee of the Bolshevik party was
considering the question of insurrection. All night long the 23d
they met. There were present all the party intellectuals, the
leaders-and delegates of the Petrograd workers and garrison. Alone
of the intellectuals Lenin and Trotzky stood for insurrection. Even   urrection. Even   |          |
the military men opposed it. A vote was taken. Insurrection was
defeated!

Then arose a rough workman, his face convulsed with rage. "I speak
for the Petrograd proletariat," he said, harshly. "We are in favour
of insurrection. Have it your own way, but I tell you now that if
you allow the Soviets to be destroyed, _we're through with you!"_
Some soldiers joined him.... And after that they voted
again-insurrection won....

However, the right wing of the Bolsheviki, led by Riazanov, Kameniev
and Zinoviev, continued to campaign against an armed rising. On the
morning of October 31st appeared in _Rabotchi Put_ the first
instalment of Lenin's "Letter to the Comrades," (See App. II, Sect.
11) one of the most audacious pieces of political propaganda the
world has ever seen. In it Lenin seriously presented the arguments
in favour of insurrection, taking as text the objections of Kameniev
and Riazonov.

"Either we must abandon our slogan, 'All Power to the Soviets,' " he
wrote, "or else we must make an insurrection. There is no middle
course...."

That same afternoon Paul Miliukov, leader of the Cadets, made a
brilliant, bitter speech (See App. II, Sect. 12) in the Council of
the Republic, branding the Skobeliev _nakaz_ as pro-German,
declaring that the "revolutionary democracy" was destroying Russia,
sneering at Terestchenko, and openly declaring that he preferred
German diplomacy to Russian.... The Left benches were one roaring
tumult all through....

On its part the Government could not ignore the significance of the
success of the Bolshevik propaganda. On the 29th joint commission of
the Government and the Council of the Republic hastily drew up two
laws, one for giving the land temporarily to the peasants, and the
other for pushing an energetic foreign policy of peace. The next day
Kerensky suspended capital punishment in the army. That same
afternoon was opened with great ceremony the first session of the
new "Commission for Strengthening the Republican Régime and Fighting
Against Anarchy and Counter-Revolution"-of which history shows not
the slightest further trace.... The following morning with two other
correspondents I interviewed Kerensky (See App. II, Sect. 13)-the
last time he received journalists.

"The Russian people," he said, bitterly, "are suffering from
economic fatigue-and from disillusionment with the Allies! The world
thinks that the Russian Revolution is at an end. Do not be mistaken.
The Russian Revolution is just beginning...." Words more prophetic,
perhaps, than he knew.

Stormy was the all-night meeting of the Petrograd Soviet the 30th of
October, at which I was present. The "moderate" Socialist
intellectuals, officers, members of Army Committees, the
_Tsay-ee-kah,_ were there in force. Against them rose up workmen,
peasants and common soldiers, passionate and simple.

A peasant told of the disorders in Tver, which he said were caused
by the arrest of the Land Committees. "This Kerensky is nothing but
a shield to the _pomieshtchiki_ (landowners)," he cried. "They know
that at the Constituent Assembly we will take the land anyway, so
they are trying to destroy the Constituent Assembly!"

A machinist from the Putilov works described how the superintendents
were closing down the departments one by one on the pretext that
there was no fuel or raw materials. The Factory-Shop Committee, he
declared, had discovered huge hidden supplies.

"It is a _provocatzia,"_ said he. "They want to starve us-or drive
us to violence!"

Among the soldiers one began, "Comrades! I bring you greetings from
the place where men are digging their graves and call them trenches!"

Then arose a tall, gaunt young soldier, with flashing eyes, met with
a roar of welcome. It was Tchudnovsky, reported killed in the July
fighting, and now risen from the dead.

"The soldier masses no longer trust their officers. Even the Army
Committees, who refused to call a meeting of our Soviet, betrayed
us.... The masses of the soldiers want the Constituent Assembly to be
held exactly when it was called for, and those who dare to postpone
it will be cursed-and not only platonic curses either, for the Army
has guns too...."

He told of the electoral campaign for the Constituent now raging in
the Fifth Army. "The officers, and especially the Mensheviki and the
Socialist Revolutionaries, are trying deliberately to cripple the
Bolsheviki. Our papers are not allowed to circulate in the trenches.
Our speakers are arrested-"

"Why don't you speak about the lack of bread?" shouted another
soldier.

"Man shall not live by bread alone," answered Tchudnovsky, sternly....

Followed him an officer, delegate from the Vitebsk Soviet, a
Menshevik _oboronetz._ "It isn't the question of who has the power.
The trouble is not with the Government, but with the war.... and the
war must be won before any change-" At this, hoots and ironical
cheers. "These Bolshevik agitators are demagogues!" The hall rocked
with laughter. "Let us for a moment forget the class struggle-" But
he got no farther. A voice yelled, "Don't you wish we would!"

Petrograd presented a curious spectacle in those days. In the
factories the committe-rooms were filled with stacks of rifles,
couriers came and went, the Red Guard [*] drilled.... In all the
[* See Notes and Explanations]
barracks meetings every night, and all day long interminable hot
arguments. On the streets the crowds thickened toward gloomy
evening, pouring in slow voluble tides up and down the Nevsky,
fighting for the newspapers.... Hold-ups increased to such an extent
that it was dangerous to walk down side streets.... On the Sadovaya
one afternoon I saw a crowd of several hundred people beat and
trample to death a soldier caught stealing.... Mysterious individuals
circulated around the shivering women who waited in _queue_ long
cold hours for bread and milk, whispering that the Jews had cornered
the food supply-and that while the people starved, the Soviet
members lived luxuriously....

At Smolny there were strict guards at the door and the outer gates,
demanding everybody's pass. The committee-rooms buzzed and hummed
all day and all night, hundreds of soldiers and workmen slept on the
floor, wherever they could find room. Upstairs in the great hall a
thousand people crowded to the uproarious sessions of the Petrograd
Soviet....

Gambling clubs functioned hectically from dusk to dawn, with
champagne flowing and stakes of twenty thousand rubles. In the
centre of the city at night prostitutes in jewels and expensive furs
walked up and down, crowded the cafés....

Monarchist plots, German spies, smugglers hatching schemes....

And in the rain, the bitter chill, the great throbbing city under
grey skies rushing faster and faster toward-what?

                              Chapter III

                              On the Eve

IN the relations of a weak Government and a rebellious people there
comes a time when every act of the authorities exasperates the
masses, and every refusal to act excites their contempt....

The proposal to abandon Petrograd raised a hurricane; Kerensky's
public denial that the Government had any such intention was met with
hoots of derision.

Pinned to the wall by the pressure of the Revolution (cried _Rabotchi
Put),_ the Government of "provisional" bourgeois tries to get free by
giving out lying assurances that it never thought of fleeing from
Petrograd, and that it didn't wish to surrender the capital....

In Kharkov thirty thousand coal miners organised, adopting the
preamble of the I. W. W. constitution: "The working class and the
employing class have nothing in common." Dispersed by Cossacks, some
were locked out by the mine-owners, and the rest declared a general
strike. Minister of Commerce and Industry Konovalov appointed his
assistant, Orlov, with plenary powers, to settle the trouble. Orlov
was hated by the miners. But the _Tsay-ee-kah_ not only supported his
appointment, but refused to demand that the Cossacks be recalled from
the Don Basin....

This was followed by the dispersal of the Soviet at Kaluga. The
Bolsheviki, having secured a majority in the Soviet, set free some
political prisoners. With the sanction of the Government Commissar
the Municipal Duma called in troops from Minsk, and bombarded the
Soviet headquarters with artillery. The Bolsheviki yielded, but as
they left the building Cossacks attacked them, crying, "This is what
we'll do to all the other Bolshevik Soviets, including those of
Moscow and Petrograd!" This incident sent a wave of panic rage
throughout Russia....

In Petrograd was ending a regional Congress of Soviets of the North,
presided over by the Bolshevik Krylenko. By an immense majority it
resolved that all power should be assumed by the All-Russian
Congress; and concluded by greeting the Bolsheviki in prison, bidding
them rejoice, for the hour of their liberation was at hand. At the
same time the first All-Russian Conference of Factory-Shop Committees
(See App. III, Sect. 1) declared emphatically for the Soviets, and
continued significantly,

After liberating themselves politically from Tsardom, the
working-class wants to see the democratic régime triumphant in the
sphere of its productive activity. This is best expressed by Workers'
Control over industrial production, which naturally arose in the
atmosphere of economic decomposition created by the criminal policy
of the dominating classes....

The Union of Railwaymen was demanding the resignation of Liverovsky,
Minister of Ways and Communications....

In the name of the _Tsay-ee-kah,_ Skobeliev insisted that the _nakaz_
be presented at the Allied Conference, and formally protested against
the sending of Terestchenko to Paris. Terestchenko offered to resign....

General Verkhovsky, unable to accomplish his reorganisation of the
army, only came to Cabinet meetings at long intervals....

On November 3d Burtzev's _Obshtchee Dielo_ came out with great
headlines:

Citizens! Save the fatherland!

I have just learned that yesterday, at a meeting of the Commission
for National Defence, Minister of War General Verkhovsky, one of the
principal persons responsible for the fall of Kornilov, proposed to
sign a separate peace, independently of the Allies.

That is treason to Russia!

Terestchenko declared that the Provisional Government had not even
examined Verkhovsky's proposition.

"You might think," said Terestchenko, "that we were in a madhouse!"

The members of the Commission were astounded at the General's words.

General Alexeyev wept.

No! It is not madness! It is worse. It is direct treason to Russia!

Kerensky, Terestchenko and Nekrassov must immediately answer us
concerning the words of Verkhovsky.

Citizens, arise!

Russia is being sold!

Save her!

What Verkhovsky really said was that the Allies must be pressed to
offer peace, because the Russian army could fight no longer....

Both in Russia and abroad the sensation was tremendous. Verkhovsky
was given "indefinite leave of absence for illhealth," and left the
Government. _Obshtchee Dielo_ was suppressed....

Sunday, November 4th, was designated as the Day of the Petrograd
Soviet, with immense meetings planned all over the city, ostensibly
to raise money for the organisation and the press; really, to make a
demonstration of strength. Suddenly it was announced that on the same
day the Cossacks would hold a _Krestny Khod_-Procession of the
Cross-in honour of the Ikon of 1612, through whose miraculous
intervention Napoleon had been driven from Moscow. The atmosphere was
electric; a spark might kindle civil war. The Petrograd Soviet issued
a manifesto, headed "Brothers-Cossacks!"

You, Cossacks, are being incited against us, workers and soldiers.
This plan of Cain is being put into operation by our common enemies,
the oppressors, the privileged classes-generals, bankers, landlords,
former officials, former servants of the Tsar.... We are hated by all
grafters, rich men, princes, nobles, generals, including your Cossack
generals. They are ready at any moment to destroy the Petrograd
Soviet and crush the Revolution....

On the 4th of November somebody is organising a Cossack religious
procession. It is a question of the free consciousness of every
individual whether he will or will not take part in this procession.
We do not interfere in this matter, nor do we obstruct anybody....
However, we warn you, Cossacks! Look out and see to it that under the
pretext of a _Krestni Khod,_ your Kaledins do not instigate you
against workmen, against soldiers....

The procession was hastily called off....

In the barracks and the working-class quarters of the town the
Bolsheviki were preaching, "All Power to the Soviets!" and agents of
the Dark Forces were urging the people to rise and slaughter the
Jews, shop-keepers, Socialist leaders....

On one side the Monarchist press, inciting to bloody repression-on
the other Lenin's great voice roaring, "Insurrection!.... We cannot
wait any longer!"

Even the bourgeois press was uneasy. (See App. III, Sect. 2)
_Birjevya Viedomosti_ (Exchange Gazette) called the Bolshevik
propaganda an attack on "the most elementary principles of
society-personal security and the respect for private property."

[Graphic page-46 Appeal of the Petrograd Soviet]

Appeal of the Petrograd Soviet to the Cosacks to call off their
_Krestny Khod_-the religious procession planned for November 4th (our
calendar). "Brothers-Cossacks!" it begins. "The Petrograd Soviet of
Workers' and Soldiers' Deputies addresses you."

But it was the "moderate" Socialist journals which were the most
hostile. (See App. III, Sect. 3) "The Bolsheviki are the most
dangerous enemies of the Revolution," declared _Dielo Naroda._ Said
the Menshevik _Dien,_ "The Government ought to defend itself and
defend us." Plekhanov's paper, _Yedinstvo_ (Unity) (See App. III,
Sect. 4), called the attention of the Government to the fact that the
Petrograd workers were being armed, and demanded stern measures
against the Bolsheviki.

Daily the Government seemed to become more helpless. Even the
Municipal administration broke down. The columns of the morning
papers were filled with accounts of the most audacious robberies and
murders, and the criminals were unmolested.

On the other hand armed workers patrolled the streets at night, doing
battle with marauders and requisitioning arms wherever they found
them.

On the first of November Colonel Polkovnikov, Military Commander of
Petrograd, issued a proclamation:

Despite the difficult days through which the country is passing,
irresponsible appeals to armed demonstrations and massacres are still
being spread around Petrograd, and from day to day robbery and
disorder increase.

This state of things is disorganising the life of the citizens, and
hinders the systematic work of the Government and the Municipal
Institutions.

In full consciousness of my responsibility and my duty before my
country, I command:

1. Every military unit, in accordance with special instructions and
within the territory of its garrison, to afford every assistance to
the Municipality, to the Commissars, and to the militia, in the
guarding of Government institutions.

2. The organisation of patrols, in co-operation with the District
Commander and the representatives of the city militia, and the taking
of measures for the arrest of criminals and deserters.

3. The arrest of all persons entering barracks and inciting to armed
demonstrations and massacres, and their delivery to the headquarters
of the Second Commander of the city.

4. To suppress any armed demonstration or riot at its start, with all
armed forces at hand.

5. To afford assistance to the Commissars in preventing unwarranted
searches in houses and unwarranted arrests.

6. To report immediately all that happens in the district under
charge to the Staff of the Petrograd Military District.

I call upon all Army Committees and organisations to afford their
help to the commanders in fulfilment of the duties with which they
are charged.

In the Council of the Republic Kerensky declared that the Government
was fully aware of the Bolshevik preparations, and had sufficient
force to cope with any demonstration. (See App. III, Sect. 5) He
accused _Novaya Rus_ and _Robotchi Put_ of both doing the same kind
of subversive work. "But owing to the absolute freedom of the press,"
he added, "the Government is not in a position to combat printed
lies. [*]...." Declaring that these were two aspects of the same
[* This was not quite candid.  The Provisional Gevernment had
suppressed Bolshevik papers before, in July, and was planning to
do so again.]
propaganda, which had for its object the counter-revolution, so
ardently desired by the Dark Forces, he went on:

"I am a doomed man, it doesn't matter what happens to me, and I have
the audacity to say that the other enigmatic part is that of the
unbelievable provocation created in the city by the Bolsheviki!"

On November 2d only fifteen delegates to the Congress of Soviets had
arrived. Next day there were a hundred, and the morning after that a
hundred and seventy-five, of whom one hundred and three were
Bolsheviki.... Four hundred constituted a quorum, and the Congress was
only three days off....

I spent a great deal of time at Smolny. It was no longer easy to get
in. Double rows of sentries guarded the outer gates, and once inside
the front door there was a long line of people waiting to be let in,
four at a time, to be questioned as to their identity and their
business. Passes were given out, and the pass system was changed
every few hours; for spies continually sneaked through....

[Graphic page-49  Russian Pass to Reed, translation follows]

Pass to Smolny Institute, issued by the Military Revolutionary
Committee, giving me the right of entry at any time. (Translation)

Military Revolutionary Committee
           attached to the
Petrograd Soviet of W. & S. D.
        Commandant's office
16th November, 1917
               No. 955
           Smolny Institute

              PASS

Is given by the present to John Reed, correspondent of
the American Socialist press, until December 1, the right of free
entry into Smolny Institute. Commandant
                               Adjutant

One day as I came up to the outer gate I saw Trotzky and his wife
just ahead of me. They were halted by a soldier. Trotzky searched
through his pockets, but could find no pass.

"Never mind," he said finally. "You know me. My name is Trotzky."

"You haven't got a pass," answered the soldier stubbornly.

"You cannot go in. Names don't mean anything to me."

"But I am the president of the Petrograd Soviet."

"Well," replied the soldier, "if you're as important a fellow as that
you must at least have one little paper."

Trotzky was very patient. "Let me see the Commandant," he said. The
soldier hesitated, grumbling something about not wanting to disturb
the Commandant for every devil that came along. He beckoned finally
to the soldier in command of the guard. Trotzky explained matters to
him. "My name is Trotzky," he repeated.

"Trotzky?" The other soldier scratched his head. "I've heard the name
somewhere," he said at length. "I guess it's all right. You can go on
in, comrade...."

In the corridor I met Karakhan, member of the Bolshevik Central
Committee, who explained to me what the new Government would be like.

"A loose organisation, sensitive to the popular will as expressed
through the Soviets, allowing local forces full play. At present the
Provisional Government obstructs the action of the local democratic
will, just as the Tsar's Government did. The initiative of the new
society shall come from below.... The form of the Government will be
modelled on the Constitution of the Russian Social Democratic Labour
Party. The new _Tsay-ee-kah,_ responsible to frequent meetings of the
All-Russian Congress of Soviets, will be the parliament; the various
Ministries will be headed by _collegia_-committees-instead of by
Ministers, and will be directly responsible to the Soviets....

On October 30th, by appointment, I went up to a small, bare room in
the attic of Smolny, to talk with Trotzky. In the middle of the room
he sat on a rough chair at a bare table. Few questions from me were
necessary; he talked rapidly and steadily, for more than an hour. The
substance of his talk, in his own words, I give here:

"The Provisional Government is absolutely powerless. The bourgeoisie
is in control, but this control is masked by a fictitious coalition
with the _oborontsi_ parties. Now, during the Revolution, one sees
revolts of peasants who are tired of waiting for their promised land;
and all over the country, in all the toiling classes, the same
disgust is evident. This domination by the bourgeoisie is only
possible by means of civil war. The Kornilov method is the only way
by which the bourgeoisie can control. But it is force which the
bourgeoisie lacks.... The Army is with us. The conciliators and
pacifists, Socialist Revolutionaries and Mensheviki, have lost all
authority-because the struggle between the peasants and the
landlords, between the workers and the employers, between the
soldiers and the officers, has become more bitter, more
irreconcilable than ever. Only by the concerted action of the popular
mass, only by the victory of proletarian dictatorship, can the
Revolution be achieved and the people saved....

"The Soviets are the most perfect representatives of the
people-perfect in their revolutionary experience, in their ideas and
objects. Based directly upon the army in the trenches, the workers in
the factories, and the peasants in the fields, they are the backbone
of the Revolution.

"There has been an attempt to create a power without the Soviets-and
only powerlessness has been created. Counter-revolutionary schemes of
all sorts are now being hatched in the corridors of the Council of
the Russian Republic. The Cadet party represents the
counter-revolution militant. On the other side, the Soviets represent
the cause of the people. Between the two camps there are no groups of
serious importance.... It is the _lutte finale._ The bourgeois
counter-revolution organises all its forces and waits for the moment
to attack us. Our answer will be decisive. We will complete the work
scarcely begun in March, and advanced during the Kornilov affair...."

He went on to speak of the new Government's foreign policy:

"Our first act will be to call for an immediate armistice on all
fronts, and a conference of peoples to discuss democratic peace
terms. The quantity of democracy we get in the peace settlement
depends on the quantity of revolutionary response there is in Europe.
If we create here a Government of the Soviets, that will be a
powerful factor for immediate peace in Europe; for this Government
will address itself directly and immediately to all peoples, over the
heads of their Governments, proposing an armistice. At the moment of
the conclusion of peace the pressure of the Russian Revolution will
be in the direction of 'no annexations,# no indemnities, the right of
self-determination of peoples,' and a _Federated Republic of Europe._...

"At the end of this war I see Europe recreated, not by the diplomats,
but by the proletariat. The Federated Republic of Europe-the United
States of Europe-that is what must be. National autonomy no longer
suffices. Economic evolution demands the abolition of national
frontiers. If Europe is to remain split into national groups, then
Imperialism will recommence its work. Only a Federated Republic of
Europe can give peace to the world." He smiled-that fine, faintly
ironical smile of his. "But without the action of the European
masses, these ends cannot be realised-now...."

Now while everybody was waiting for the Bolsheviki to appear suddenly
on the streets one morning and begin to shoot down people with white
collars on, the real insurrection took its way quite naturally and
openly.

The Provisional Government planned to send the Petrograd garrison to
the front.

The Petrograd garrison numbered about sixty thousand men, who had
taken a prominent part in the Revolution. It was they who had turned
the tide in the great days of March, created the Soviets of Soldiers'
Deputies, and hurled back Kornilov from the gates of Petrograd.

Now a large part of them were Bolsheviki. When the Provisional
Government talked of evacuating the city, it was the Petrograd
garrison which answered, "If you are not capable of defending the
capital, conclude peace; if you cannot conclude peace, go away and
make room for a People's Government which can do both...."

It was evident that any attempt at insurrection depended upon the
attitude of the Petrograd garrison. The Government's plan was to
replace the garrison regiments with "dependable" troops-Cossacks,
Death Battalions. The Army Committees, the "moderate" Socialists and
the _Tsay-ee-kah_ supported the Government. A wide-spread agitation
was carried on at the Front and in Petrograd, emphasizing the fact
that for eight months the Petrograd garrison had been leading an easy
life in the barracks of the capital, while their exhausted comrades
in the trenches starved and died.

Naturally there was some truth in the accusation that the garrison
regiments were reluctant to exchange their comparative comfort for
the hardships of a winter campaign. But there were other reasons why
they refused to go. The Petrograd Soviet feared the Government's
intentions, and from the Front came hundreds of delegates, chosen by
the common soldiers, crying, "It is true we need reinforcements, but
more important, we must know that Petrograd and the Revolution are
well-guarded.... Do you hold the rear, comrades, and we will hold the
front!"

On October 25th, behind closed doors, the Central Committee of the
Petrograd Soviet discussed the formation of a special Military
Committee to decide the whole question. The next day a meeting of the
Soldiers' Section of the Petrograd Soviet elected a Committee, which
immediately proclaimed a boycott of the bourgeois newspapers, and
condemned the _Tsay-ee-kah_ for opposing the Congress of Soviets. On
the 29th, in open session of the Petrograd Soviet, Trotzky proposed
that the Soviet formally sanction the Military Revolutionary
Committee. "We ought," he said, "to create our special organisation
to march to battle, and if necessary to die...." It was decided to send
to the front two delegations, one from the Soviet and one from the
garrison, to confer with the Soldiers' Committees and the General
Staff.

At Pskov, the Soviet delegates were met by General Tcheremissov,
commander of the Northern Front, with the curt declaration that he
had ordered the Petrograd garrison to the trenches, and that was all.
The garrison committee was not allowed to leave Petrograd....

A delegation of the Soldiers' Section of the Petrograd Soviet asked
that a representative be admitted to the Staff of the Petrograd
District. Refused. The Petrograd Soviet demanded that no orders be
issued without the approval of the Soldiers' Section. Refused. The
delegates were roughly told, "We only recognise the _Tsay-ee-kah._ We
do not recognise you; if you break any laws, we shall arrest you."

On the 30th a meeting of representatives of all the Petrograd
regiments passed a resolution: _"The Petrograd garrison no longer
recognises the Provisional Government. The Petrograd Soviet is our
Government. We will obey only the orders of the Petrograd Soviet,
through the Military Revolutionary Committee."_ The local military
units were ordered to wait for instructions from the Soldiers'
Section of the Petrograd Soviet.

Next day the _Tsay-ee-kah_ summoned its own meeting, composed largely
of officers, formed a Committee to cooperate with the Staff, and
detailed Commissars in all quarters of the city.

A great soldier meeting at Smolny on the 3d resolved:

Saluting the creation of the Military Revolutionary Committee, the
Petrograd garrison promises it complete support in all its actions,
to unite more closely the front and the rear in the interests of the
Revolution.

The garrison moreover declares that with the revolutionary
proletariat it assures the maintenance of revolutionary order in
Petrograd. Every attempt at provocation on the part of the
Kornilovtsi or the bourgeoisie will be met with merciless resistance.

Now conscious of its power, the Military Revolutionary Committee
peremptorily summoned the Petrograd Staff to submit to its control.
To all printing plants it gave orders not to publish any appeals or
proclamations without the Committee's authorisation. Armed Commissars
visited the Kronversk arsenal and seized great quantities of arms and
ammunition, halting a shipment of ten thousand bayonets which was
being sent to Novotcherkask, headquarters of Kaledin....

Suddenly awake to the danger, the Government offered immunity if the
Committee would disband. Too late. At midnight November 5th Kerensky
himself sent Malevsky to offer the Petrograd Soviet representation on
the Staff. The Military Revolutionary Committee accepted. An hour
later General Manikovsky, acting Minister of war, countermanded the
offer....

Tuesday morning, November 6th, the city was thrown into excitement by
the appearance of a placard signed, "Military Revolutionary Committee
attached to the Petrograd Soviet of Workers' and Soldiers' Deputies."

To the Population of Petrograd. Citizens!

Counter-revolution has raised its criminal head. The Kornilovtsi are
mobilising their forces in order to crush the All-Russian Congress of
Soviets and break the Constituent Assembly. At the same time the
_pogromists_ may attempt to call upon the people of Petrograd for
trouble and bloodshed. The Petrograd Soviet of Workers' and Soldiers'
Deputies takes upon itself the guarding of revolutionary order in the
city against counter-revolutionary and _pogrom_ attempts.

The Petrograd garrison will not allow any violence or disorders. The
population is invited to arrest hooligans and Black Hundred agitators
and take them to the Soviet Commissars at the nearest barracks. At
the first attempt of the Dark Forces to make trouble on the streets
of Petrograd, whether robbery or fighting, the criminals will be
wiped off the face of the earth!

Citizens! We call upon you to maintain complete quiet and
self-possession. The cause of order and Revolution is in strong hands.

List of regiments where there are Commissars of the Military
Revolutionary Committee....

On the 3rd the leaders of the Bolsheviki had another historic meeting
behind closed doors. Notified by Zalkind, I waited in the corridor
outside the door; and Volodarsky as he came out told me what was
going on.

Lenin spoke: "November 6th will be too early. We must have an
all-Russian basis for the rising; and on the 6th all the delegates to
the Congress will not have arrived.... On the other hand, November 8th
will be too late. By that time the Congress will be organised, and it
is difficult for a large organised body of people to take swift,
decisive action. We must act on the 7th, the day the Congress meets,
so that we may say to it, 'Here is the power! What are you going to
do with it?'"

In a certain upstairs room sat a thin-faced, long-haired individual,
once an officer in the armies of the Tsar, then revolutionist and
exile, a certain Avseenko, called Antonov, mathematician and
chess-player; he was drawing careful plans for the seizure of the
capital.

On its side the Government was preparing. Inconspicuously certain of
the most loyal regiments, from widely-separated divisions, were
ordered to Petrograd. The _yunker_ artillery was drawn into the
Winter Palace. Patrols of Cossacks made their appearance in the
streets, for the first time since the July days. Polkovnikov issued
order after order, threatening to repress all insubordination with
the "utmost energy." Kishkin, Minister of Public Instruction, the
worsthated member of the Cabinet, was appointed Special Commissar to
keep order in Petrograd; he named as assistants two men no less
unpopular, Rutenburg and Paltchinsky. Petrograd, Cronstadt and
Finland were declared in a state of siege-upon which the bourgeois
_Novoye Vremya_ (New Times) remarked ironically:

Why the state of siege? The Government is no longer a power. It has
no moral authority and it does not possess the necessary apparatus to
use force.... In the most favourable circumstances it can only
negotiate with any one who consents to parley. Its authority goes no
farther....

Monday morning, the 5th, I dropped in at the Marinsky Palace, to see
what was happening in the Council of the Russian Republic. Bitter
debate on Terestchenko's foreign policy. Echoes of the
Burtzev-Verkhovski affair. All the diplomats present except the
Italian ambassador, who everybody said was prostrated by the Carso
disaster....

As I came in, the Left Socialist Revolutionary Karelin was reading
aloud an editorial from the London _Times_ which said, "The remedy
for Bolshevism is bullets!" Turning to the Cadets he cried, "That's
what _you_ think, too!"

Voices from the Right, "Yes! Yes!"

"Yes, I know you think so," answered Karelin, hotly. "But you haven't
the courage to try it!"

Then Skobeliev, looking like a matinée idol with his soft blond beard
and wavy yellow hair, rather apologetically defending the Soviet
_nakaz._ Terestchenko followed, assailed from the Left by cries of
"Resignation! Resignation!" He insisted that the delegates of the
Government and of the _Tsay-ee-kah_ to Paris should have a common
point of view-his own. A few words about the restoration of
discipline in the army, about war to victory.... Tumult, and over the
stubborn opposition of the truculent Left, the Council of the
Republic passed to the simple order of the day.

There stretched the rows of Bolshevik seats-empty since that first
day when they left the Council, carrying with them so much life. As I
went down the stairs it seemed to me that in spite of the bitter
wrangling, no real voice from the rough world outside could penetrate
this high, cold hall, and that the Provisional Government was
wrecked-on the same rock of War and Peace that had wrecked the
Miliukov Ministry.... The doorman grumbled as he put on my coat, "I
don't know what is becoming of poor Russia. All these Mensheviki and
Bolsheviki and Trudoviki.... This Ukraine and this Finland and the
German imperialists and the English imperialists. I am forty-five
years old, and in all my life I never heard so many words as in this
place...."

In the corridor I met Professor Shatsky, a rat-faced individual in a
dapper frock-coat, very influential in the councils of the Cadet
party. I asked him what he thought of the much-talked-of Bolshevik
_vystuplennie._ He shrugged, sneering.

"They are cattle-_canaille,"_ he answered. "They will not dare, or if
they dare they will soon be sent flying. From our point of view it
will not be bad, for then they will ruin themselves and have no power
in the Constituent Assembly....

"But, my dear sir, allow me to outline to you my plan for a form of
Government to be submitted to the Constituent Assembly. You see, I am
chairman of a commission appointed from this body, in conjunction
with the Provisional Government, to work out a constitutional
project.... We will have a legislative assembly of two chambers, such
as you have in the United States. In the lower chamber will be
territorial representatives; in the upper, representatives of the
liberal professions, zemstvos, Cooperatives-and Trade Unions...."

Outside a chill, damp wind came from the west, and the cold mud
underfoot soaked through my shoes. Two companies of _yunkers_ passed
swinging up the Morskaya, tramping stiffly in their long coats and
singing an oldtime crashing chorus, such as the soldiers used to sing
under the Tsar.... At the first cross-street I noticed that the City
Militiamen were mounted, and armed with revolvers in bright new
holsters; a little group of people stood silently staring at them. At
the corner of the Nevsky I bought a pamphlet by Lenin, "Will the
Bolsheviki be Able to Hold the Power?" paying for it with one of the
stamps which did duty for small change. The usual street-cars crawled
past, citizens and soldiers clinging to the outside in a way to make
Theodore P. Shonts green with envy.... Along the sidewalk a row of
deserters in uniform sold cigarettes and sunflower seeds....

Up the Nevsky in the sour twilight crowds were battling for the
latest papers, and knots of people were trying to make out the
multitudes of appeals (See App. III, Sect. 6) and proclamations
pasted in every flat place; from the _Tsay-ee-kah,_ the Peasants'
Soviets, the "moderate" Socialist parties, the Army
Committees-threatening, cursing, beseeching the workers and soldiers
to stay home, to support the Government....

An armoured automobile went slowly up and down, siren screaming. On
every corner, in every open space, thick groups were clustered;
arguing soldiers and students. Night came swiftly down, the
wide-spaced street-lights flickered on, the tides of people flowed
endlessly.... It is always like that in Petrograd just before trouble....

The city was nervous, starting at every sharp sound. But still no
sign from the Bolsheviki; the soldiers stayed in the barracks, the
workmen in the factories.... We went to a moving picture show near the
Kazan Cathedral-a bloody Italian film of passion and intrigue. Down
front were some soldiers and sailors, staring at the screen in
childlike wonder, totally unable to comprehend why there should be so
much violent running about, and so much homicide....

From there I hurried to Smolny. In room 10 on the top floor, the
Military Revolutionary Committee sat in continuous session, under the
chairmanship of a tow-headed, eighteen-year-old boy named Lazimir. He
stopped, as he passed, to shake hands rather bashfully.

"Peter-Paul Fortress has just come over to us," said he, with a
pleased grin. "A minute ago we got word from a regiment that was
ordered by the Government to come to Petrograd. The men were
suspicious, so they stopped the train at Gatchina and sent a
delegation to us. 'What's the matter?' they asked. 'What have you got
to say? We have just passed a resolution, "All Power to the
Soviets."'... The Military Revolutionary Committee sent back word,
'Brothers! We greet you in the name of the Revolution. Stay where you
are until further instructions!'"

All telephones, he said, were cut off: but communication with the
factories and barracks was established by means of military
telephonograph apparatus....

A steady stream of couriers and Commissars came and went. Outside the
door waited a dozen volunteers, ready to carry word to the farthest
quarters of the city. One of them, a gypsy-faced man in the uniform
of a lieutenant, said in French, "Everything is ready to move at the
push of a button...."

There passed Podvoisky, the thin, bearded civillian whose brain
conceived the strategy of insurrection; Antonov, unshaven, his collar
filthy, drunk with loss of sleep; Krylenko, the squat, wide-faced
soldier, always smiling, with his violent gestures and tumbling
speech; and Dybenko, the giant bearded sailor with the placid face.
These were the men of the hour-and of other hours to come.

Downstairs in the office of the Factory-Shop Committees sat Seratov,
signing orders on the Government Arsenal for arms-one hundred and
fifty rifles for each factory.... Delegates waited in line, forty of
them....

In the hall I ran into some of the minor Bolshevik leaders. One
showed me a revolver. "The game is on," he said, and his face was
pale. "Whether we move or not the other side knows it must finish us
or be finished...."

The Petrograd Soviet was meeting day and night. As I came into the
great hall Trotzky was just finishing.

"We are asked," he said, "if we intend to have a _vystuplennie._ I
can give a clear answer to that question. The Petrograd Soviet feels
that at last the moment has arrived when the power must fall into the
hands of the Soviets. This transfer of government will be
accomplished by the All-Russian Congress. Whether an armed
demonstration is necessary will depend on... those who wish to
interfere with the All-Russian Congress....

"We feel that our Government, entrusted to the personnel of the
Provisional Cabinet, is a pitiful and helpless Government, which only
awaits the sweep of the broom of History to give way to a really
popular Government. But we are trying to avoid a conflict, even now,
to-day. We hope that the All-Russian Congress will take... into its
hands that power and authority which rests upon the organised freedom
of the people. If, however, the Government wants to utilise the short
period it is expected to live-twenty-four, forty eight, or
seventy-two hours-to attack us, then we shall answer with
counter-attacks, blow for blow, steel for iron!"

Amid cheers he announced that the Left Socialist Revolutionaries had
agreed to send representatives into the Military Revolutionary
Committee....

As I left Smolny, at three o'clock in the morning, I noticed that two
rapid-firing guns had been mounted, one on each side of the door, and
that strong patrols of soldiers guarded the gates and the near-by
street-corners. Bill Shatov [*] came bounding up the steps. "Well," he
[* Well known in the American labor movement.]
cried, "We're off! Kerensky sent the _yunkers_ to close down our
papers, _Soldat_ and _Rabotchi Put._ But our troops went down and
smashed the Government seals, and now we're sending detachments to
seize the bourgeois newspaper offices!" Exultantly he slapped me on
the shoulder, and ran in....

On the morning of the 6th I had business with the censor, whose
office was in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Everywhere, on all the
walls, hysterical appeals to the people to remain "calm." Polkovnikov
emitted _prikaz_ after _prikaz:_

I order all military units and detachments to remain in their
barracks until further orders from the Staff of the Military
District.... All officers who act without orders from their superiors
will be court-martialled for mutiny. I forbid absolutely any
execution by soldiers of instructions from other organisations....

The morning papers announced that the Government had suppressed the
papers _Novaya Rus, Zhivoye Slovo, Rabotchi Put_ and _Soldat,_ and
decreed the arrest of the leaders of the Petrograd Soviet and the
members of the Military Revolutionary Committee....

As I crossed the Palace Square several batteries of _yunker_
artillery came through the Red Arch at a jingling trot, and drew up
before the Palace. The great red building of the General Staff was
unusually animated, several armoured automobiles ranked before the
door, and motors full of officers were coming and going.... The censor
was very much excited, like a small boy at a circus. Kerensky, he
said, had just gone to the Council of the Republic to offer his
resignation. I hurried down to the Marinsky Palace, arriving at the
end of that passionate and almost incoherent speech of Kerensky's,
full of self-justification and bitter denunciation of his enemies.

"I will cite here the most characteristic passage from a whole series
of articles published in _Rabotchi Put_ by Ulianov-Lenin, a state
criminal who is in hiding and whom we are trying to find.... This state
criminal has invited the proletariat and the Petrograd garrison to
repeat the experience of the 16th-18th of July, and insists upon the
immediate necessity for an armed rising.... Moreover, other Bolshevik
leaders have taken the floor in a series of meetings, and also made
an appeal to immediate insurrection. Particularly should be noticed
the activity of the present president of the Petrograd Soviet,
Bronstein-Trotzky....

"I ought to bring to your notice... that the expressions and the style
of a whole series of articles in _Rabotchi Put_ and _Soldat_ resemble
absolutely those of _Novaya Rus...._ We have to do not so much with the
movement of such and such political party, as with the exploitation
of the political ignorance and criminal instincts of a part of the
population, a sort of organisation whose object it is to provoke in
Russia, cost what it may, an inconscient movement of destruction and
pillage; for given the state of mind of the masses, any movement at
Petrograd will be followed by the most terrible massacres, which will
cover with eternal shame the name of free Russia....

"... By the admission of Ulianov-Lenin himself, the situation of the
extreme left wing of the Social Democrats in Russia is very
favourable." (Here Kerensky read the following quotation from Lenin's
article.):

Think of it!... The German comrades have only one Liebknecht, without
newspapers, without freedom of meeting, without a Soviet.... They are
opposed by the incredible hostility of all classes of society-and yet
the German comrades try to act; while we, having dozens of
newspapers, freedom of meeting, the majority of the Soviets, we, the
best-placed international proletarians of the entire world, can we
refuse to support the German revolutionists and insurrectionary
organisations?...

Kerensky then continued:

"The organisers of rebellion recognise thus implicitly that the most
perfect conditions for the free action of a political party obtain
now in Russia, administered by a Provisional Government at the head
of which is, in the eyes of this party, 'a usurper and a man who has
sold himself to the bourgeoisie, the Minister-President Kerensky....'

"... The organisers of the insurrection do not come to the aid of the
German proletariat, but of the German governing classes, and they
open the Russian front to the iron fists of Wilhelm and his friends....
Little matter to the Provisional Government the motives of these
people, little matter if they act consciously or unconsciously; but
in any case, from this tribune, in full consciousness of my
responsibility, I quality such acts of a Russian political party as
acts of treason to Russia!

"... I place myself at the point of view of the Right, and I propose
immediately to proceed to an investigation and make the necessary
arrests." (Uproar from the Left.) "Listen to me!" he cried in a
powerful voice. "At the moment when the state is in danger, because
of conscious or unconscious treason, the Provisional Government, and
myself among others, prefer to be killed rather than betray the life,
the honour and the independence of Russia...."

At this moment a paper was handed to Kerensky.

"I have just received the proclamation which they are distributing to
the regiments. Here is the contents." Reading: _"'The Petrograd
Soviet of Workers' and Soldiers' Deputies is menaced. We order
immediately the regiments to mobilise on a war footing and to await
new orders. All delay or non-execution of this order will be
considered as an act of treason to the Revolution. The Military
Revolutionary Committee. For the President, Podvoisky. The Secretary,
Antonov.'_

"In reality, this is an attempt to raise the populace against the
existing order of things, to break the Constituent and to open the
front to the regiments of the iron fist of Wilhelm....

"I say 'populace' intentionally, because the conscious democracy and
its _Tsay-ee-kah,_ all the Army organisations, all that free Russia
glorifies, the good sense, the honour and the conscience of the great
Russian democracy, protests against these things....

"I have not come here with a prayer, but to state my firm conviction
that the Provisional Government, which defends at this moment our new
liberty-that the new Russian state, destined to a brilliant future,
will find unanimous support except among those who have never dared
to face the truth....

"... The Provisional Government has never violated the liberty of all
citizens of the State to use their political rights.... But now the
Provisional Government.... declares: in this moment those elements of
the Russian nation, those groups and parties who have dared to lift
their hands against the free will of the Russian people, at the same
time threatening to open the front to Germany, must be liquidated
with decision!...

"Let the population of Petrograd understand that it will encounter a
firm power, and perhaps at the last moment good sense, conscience and
honour will triumph in the hearts of those who still possess them...."

All through this speech, the hall rang with deafening clamour. When
the Minister-President had stepped down, pale-faced and wet with
perspiration, and strode out with his suite of officers, speaker
after speaker from the Left and Centre attacked the Right, all one
angry roaring. Even the Socialist Revolutionaries, through Gotz:

"The policy of the Bolsheviki is demagogic and criminal, in their
exploitation of the popular discontent. But there is a whole series
of popular demands which have received no satisfaction up to now....
The questions of peace, land and the democratization of the army
ought to be stated in such a fashion that no soldier, peasant or
worker would have the least doubt that our Government is attempting,
firmly and infallibly, to solve them....

"We Mensheviki do not wish to provoke a Cabinet crisis, and we are
ready to defend the Provisional Government with all our energy, to
the last drop of our blood-if only the Provisional Government, on all
these burning questions, will speak the clear and precise words
awaited by the people with such impatience...."

Then Martov, furious:

"The words of the Minister-President, who allowed himself to speak of
'populace' when it is question of the movement of important sections
of the proletariat and the army-although led in the wrong
direction-are nothing but an incitement to civil war."

The order of the day proposed by the Left was voted. It amounted
practically to a vote of lack of confidence.

1. The armed demonstration which has been preparing for some days
past has for its object a _coup d'etat,_ threatens to provoke civil
war, creates conditions favourable to _pogroms_ and
counterrevolution, the mobilization of counter-revolutionary forces,
such as the Black Hundreds, which will inevitably bring about the
impossibility of convoking the Constituent, will cause a military
catastrophe, the death of the Revolution, paralyse the economic life
of the country and destroy Russia;

2. The conditions favourable to this agitation have been created by
delay in passing urgent measures, as well as objective conditions
caused by the war and the general disorder. It is necessary before
everything to promulgate at once a decree transmitting the land to
the peasants' Land Committees, and to adopt an energetic course of
action abroad in proposing to the Allies to proclaim their peace
terms and to begin peace-parleys;

3. To cope with Monarchist manifestations and _pogromist_ movements,
it is indispensable to take immediate measures to suppress these
movements, and for this purpose to create at Petrograd a Committee of
Public Safety, composed of representatives of the Municipality and
the organs of the revolutionary democracy, acting in contact with the
Provisional Government....

It is interesting to note that the Mensheviki and Socialist
Revolutionaries all rallied to this resolution.... When Kerensky saw
it, however, he summoned Avksentiev to the Winter Palace to explain.
If it expressed a lack of confidence in the Provisional Government,
he begged Avksentiev to form a new Cabinet. Dan, Gotz and Avksentiev,
the leaders of the "compromisers," performed their last compromise....
They explained to Kerensky that it was not meant as a criticism of
the Government!

At the corner of the Morskaya and the Nevsky, squads of soldiers with
fixed bayonets were stopping all private automobiles, turning out the
occupants, and ordering them toward the Winter Palace. A large crowd
had gathered to watch them. Nobody knew whether the soldiers belonged
to the Government or the Military Revolutionary Committee. Up in
front of the Kazan Cathedral the same thing was happening, machines
being directed back up the Nevsky. Five or six sailors with rifles
came along, laughing excitedly, and fell into conversation with two
of the soldiers. On the sailors' hat bands were _Avrora_ and _Zaria
Svobody,_-the names of the leading Bolshevik cruisers of the Baltic
Fleet. One of them said, "Cronstadt is coming!"... It was as if, in
1792, on the streets of Paris, some one had said: "The Marseillais
are coming!" For at Cronstadt were twenty-five thousand sailors,
convinced Bolsheviki and not afraid to die....

_Rabotchi i Soldat_ was just out, all its front page one huge
proclamation: SOLDIERS! WORKERS! CITIZENS!

The enemies of the people passed last night to the offensive. The
Kornilovists of the Staff are trying to draw in from the suburbs
_yunkers_ and volunteer battalions. The Oranienbaum _yunkers_ and the
Tsarskoye Selo volunteers refused to come out. A stroke of high
treason is being contemplated against the Petrograd Soviet.... The
campaign of the counter-revolutionists is being directed against the
All-Russian Congress of Soviets on the eve of its opening, against
the Constituent Assembly, against the people. The Petrograd Soviet is
guarding the Revolution. The Military Revolutionary Committee is
directing the repulse of the conspirators' attack. The entire
garrison and proletariat of Petrograd are ready to deal the enemy of
the people a crushing blow.

The Military Revolutionary Committee decrees:

1. All regimental, division and battle-ship Committees, together with
the Soviet Commissars, and all revolutionary organisations, shall
meet in continuous session, concentrating in their hands all
information about the plans of the conspirators.

2. Not one soldier shall leave his division without permission of the
Committee.

3. To send to Smolny at once two delegates from each military unit
and five from each Ward Soviet.

4. All members of the Petrograd Soviet and all delegates to the
All-Russian Congress are invited immediately to Smolny for an
extraordinary meeting.

Counter-revolution has raised its criminal head.

A great danger threatens all the conquests and hopes of the soldiers
and workers.

But the forces of the Revolution by far exceed those of its enemies.

The cause of the People is in strong hands. The conspirators will be
crushed.

No hesitation or doubts! Firmness, steadfastness, discipline,
determination!

Long live the Revolution!

_The Military Revolutionary Committee._

The Petrograd Soviet was meeting continuously at Smolny, a centre of
storm, delegates falling down asleep on the floor and rising again to
take part in the debate, Trotzky, Kameniev, Volodarsky speaking six,
eight, twelve hours a day....

I went down to room 18 on the first floor where the Bolshevik
delegates were holding caucus, a harsh voice steadily booming, the
speaker hidden by the crowd: "The compromisers say that we are
isolated. Pay no attention to them. Once it begins they must be
dragged along with us, or else lose their following...."

Here he held up a piece of paper. "We are dragging them! A message
has just come from the Mensheviki and Socialist Revolutionaries! They
say that they condemn our action, but that if the Government attacks
us they will not oppose the cause of the proletariat!" Exultant
shouting....

As night fell the great hall filled with soldiers and workmen, a
monstrous dun mass, deep-humming in a blue haze of smoke. The old
_Tsay-ee-kah_ had finally decided to welcome the delegates to that
new Congress which would mean its own ruin-and perhaps the ruin of
the revolutionary order it had built. At this meeting, however, only
members of the _Tsay-ee-kah_ could vote....

It was after midnight when Gotz took the chair and Dan rose to speak,
in a tense silence, which seemed to me almost menacing.

"The hours in which we live appear in the most tragic colours," he
said. "The enemy is at the gates of Petrograd, the forces of the
democracy are trying to organise to resist him, and yet we await
bloodshed in the streets of the capital, and famine threatens to
destroy, not only our homogeneous Government, but the Revolution
itself....

"The masses are sick and exhausted. They have no interest in the
Revolution. If the Bolsheviki start anything, that will be the end of
the Revolution..." (Cries, "That's a lie!)" "The counter-revolutionists
are waiting with the Bolsheviki to begin riots and massacres.... If
there is any _vystuplennie,_ there will be no Constituent Assembly...."
(Cries, "Lie! Shame!")

"It is inadmissible that in the zone of military operations the
Petrograd garrison shall not submit to the orders of the Staff.... You
must obey the orders of the Staff and of the _Tsay-ee-kah_ elected by
you. All Power to the Soviets-that means death! Robbers and thieves
are waiting for the moment to loot and burn.... When you have such
slogans put before you, 'Enter the houses, take away the shoes and
clothes from the bourgeoisie-'" (Tumult. Cries, "No such slogan! A
lie! A lie!") "Well, it may start differently, but it will end that
way!

"The _Tsay-ee-kah_ has full power to act, and must be obeyed.... We are
not afraid of bayonets.... The _Tsay-ee-kah_ will defend the Revolution
with its body...." (Cries, "It was a dead body long ago!")

Immense continued uproar, in which his voice could be heard
screaming, as he pounded the desk, "Those who are urging this are
committing a crime!"

Voice: "You committed a crime long ago, when you captured the power
and turned it over to the bourgeoisie!"

Gotz, ringing the chairman's bell: "Silence, or I'll have you put
out!"

Voice: "Try it!" (Cheers and whistling.)

"Now concerning our policy about peace." (Laughter.) "Unfortunately
Russia can no longer support the continuation of the war. There is
going to be peace, but not permanent peace-not a democratic peace....
To-day, at the Council of the Republic, in order to avoid bloodshed,
we passed an order of the day demanding the surrender of the land to
the Land Committees and immediate peace negotiations...." (Laughter,
and cries, "Too late!")

Then for the Bolsheviki, Trotzky mounted the tribune, borne on a wave
of roaring applause that burst into cheers and a rising house,
thunderous. His thin, pointed face was positively Mephistophelian in
its expression of malicious irony.

"Dan's tactics prove that the masses-the great, dull, indifferent
masses-are absolutely with him!" (Titantic mirth.) He turned toward
the chairman, dramatically. "When we spoke of giving the land to the
peasants, you were against it. We told the peasants, 'If they don't
give it to you, take it yourselves!' and the peasants followed our
advice. And now you advocate what we did six months ago....

"I don't think Kerensky's order to suspend the death penalty in the
army was dictated by his ideals. I think Kerensky was persuaded by
the Petrograd garrison, which refused to obey him....

"To-day Dan is accused of having made a speech in the Council of the
Republic which proves him to be a secret Bolshevik.... The time may
come when Dan will say that the flower of the Revolution participated
in the rising of July 16th and 18th.... In Dan's resolution to-day at
the Council of the Republic there was no mention of enforcing
discipline in the army, although that is urged in the propaganda of
his party....

"No. The history of the last seven months shows that the masses have
left the Mensheviki. The Mensheviki and the Socialist Revolutionaries
conquered the Cadets, and then when they got the power, they gave it
to the Cadets....

"Dan tells you that you have no right to make an insurrection.
Insurrection is the right of all revolutionists! When the
down-trodden masses revolt, it is their right...."

Then the long-faced, cruel-tongued Lieber, greeted with groans and
laughter.

"Engels and Marx said that the proletariat had no right to take power
until it was ready for it. In a bourgeois revolution like this.... the
seizure of power by the masses means the tragic end of the
Revolution.... Trotzky, as a Social Democratic theorist, is himself
opposed to what he is now advocating...." (Cries, "Enough! Down with
him!")

Martov, constantly interrupted: "The Internationalists are not
opposed to the transmission of power to the democracy, but they
disapprove of the methods of the Bolsheviki. This is not the moment
to seize the power...."

Again Dan took the floor, violently protesting against the action of
the Military Revolutionary Committee, which had sent a Commissar to
seize the office of _Izviestia_ and censor the paper. The wildest
uproar followed. Martov tried to speak, but could not be heard.
Delegates of the Army and the Baltic Fleet stood up all over the
hall, shouting that the Soviet was _their_ Government....

Amid the wildest confusion Ehrlich offered a resolution, appealing to
the workers and soldiers to remain calm and not to respond to
provocations to demonstrate, recognising the necessity of immediately
creating a Committee of Public Safety, and asking the Provisional
Government at once to pass decrees transferring the land to the
peasants and beginning peace negotiations....

Then up leaped Volodarsky, shouting harshly that the _Tsay-ee-kah,_
on the eve of the Congress, had no right to assume the functions of
the Congress. The _Tsay-ee-kah_ was practically dead, he said, and
the resolution was simply a trick to bolster up its waning power....

"As for us, Bolsheviki, we will not vote on this resolution!"
Whereupon all the Bolsheviki left the hall and the resolution was
passed....

Toward four in the morning I met Zorin in the outer hall, a rifle
slung from his shoulder.

"We're moving!" (See App. III, Sect. 7) said he, calmly but with
satisfaction. "We pinched the Assistant Minister of Justice and the
Minister of Religions. They're down cellar now. One regiment is on
the march to capture the Telephone Exchange, another the Telegraph
Agency, another the State Bank. The Red Guard is out...."

On the steps of Smolny, in the chill dark, we first saw the Red
Guard-a huddled group of boys in workmen's clothes, carrying guns
with bayonets, talking nervously together.

Far over the still roofs westward came the sound of scattered rifle
fire, where the _yunkers_ were trying to open the bridges over the
Neva, to prevent the factory workers and soldiers of the Viborg
quarter from joining the Soviet forces in the centre of the city; and
the Cronstadt sailors were closing them again....

Behind us great Smolny, bright with lights, hummed like a gigantic
hive....

                              Chapter IV

                    The Fall of the Provisional Government

WEDNESDAY, November 7th, I rose very late. The noon cannon boomed
from Peter-Paul as I went down the Nevsky. It was a raw, chill day.
In front of the State Bank some soldiers with fixed bayonets were
standing at the closed gates.

"What side do you belong to?" I asked. "The Government?"

"No more Government," one answered with a grin, "_Slava Bogu!_ Glory
to God!" That was all I could get out of him....

The street-cars were running on the Nevsky, men, women and small
boys hanging on every projection. Shops were open, and there seemed
even less uneasiness among the street crowds than there had been the
day before. A whole crop of new appeals against insurrection had
blossomed out on the walls during the night-to the peasants, to the
soldiers at the front, to the workmen of Petrograd. One read:

FROM THE PETROGRAD MUNICIPAL DUMA:

The Municipal Duma informs the citizens that in the extraordinary
meeting of November 6th the Duma formed a Committee of Public
Safety, composed of members of the Central and Ward Dumas, and
representatives of the following revolutionary democratic
organizations: The _Tsay-ee-kah,_ the All-Russian Executive
Committee of Peasant Deputies, the Army organisations, the
_Tsentroflot,_ the Petrograd Soviet of Workers' and Soldiers'
Deputies (!), the Council of Trade Unions, and others.

Members of the Committee of Public Safety will be on duty in the
building of the Municipal Duma. Telephones No. 15-40, 223-77, 138-36.

November 7th, 1917.

Though I didn't realize it then, this was the Duma's declaration of
war against the Bolsheviki.

I bought a copy of _Rabotchi Put,_ the only newspaper which seemed
on sale, and a little later paid a soldier fifty kopeks for a
second-hand copy of _Dien._ The Bolshevik paper, printed on
large-sized sheets in the conquered office of the _Russkaya Volia,_
had huge headlines: "ALL POWER-TO THE SOVIETS OF WORKERS, SOLDIERS
AND PEASANTS! PEACE! BREAD! LAND!" The leading article was signed
"Zinoviev,"-Lenin's companion in hiding. It began:

Every soldier, every worker, every real Socialist, every honest
democrat realises that there are only two alternatives to the
present situation.

Either-the power will remain in the hands of the bourgeois-landlord
crew, and this will mean every kind of repression for the workers,
soldiers and peasants, continuation of the war, inevitable hunger
and death....

Or-the power will be transferred to the hands of the revolutionary
workers, soldiers and peasants; and in that case it will mean a
complete abolition of landlord tyranny, immediate check of the
capitalists, immediate proposal of a just peace. Then the land is
assured to the peasants, then control of industry is assured to the
workers, then bread is assured to the hungry, then the end of this
nonsensical war!...

_Dien_ contained fragmentary news of the agitated night. Bolsheviki
capture of the Telephone Exchange, the Baltic station, the Telegraph
Agency; the Peterhof _yunkers_ unable to reach Petrograd; the
Cossacks undecided; arrest of some of the Ministers; shooting of
Chief of the City Militia Meyer;  arrests, counter-arrests,
skirmishes between clashing patrols of soldiers, _yunkers_ and Red
Guards. (See App. IV, Sect. 1)

On the corner of the Morskaya I ran into Captain Gomberg, Menshevik
_oboronetz,_ secretary of the Military Section of his party. When I
asked him if the insurrection had really happened he shrugged his
shoulders in a tired manner and replied, "_Tchort znayet!_ The devil
knows! Well, perhaps the Bolsheviki can seize the power, but they
won't be able to hold it more than three days. They haven't the men
to run a government. Perhaps it's a good thing to let them try-that
will furnish them...."

The Military Hotel at the corner of St. Isaac's Square was picketed
by armed sailors. In the lobby were many of the smart young
officers, walking up and down or muttering together; the sailors
wouldn't let them leave....

Suddenly came the sharp crack of a rifle outside, followed by a
scattered burst of firing. I ran out. Something unusual was going on
around the Marinsky Palace, where the Council of the Russian
Republic met. Diagonally across the wide square was drawn a line of
soldiers, rifles ready, staring at the hotel roof.

"_Provacatzia!_ Shot at us!" snapped one, while another went running
toward the door.

At the western corner of the Palace lay a big armoured car with a
red flag flying from it, newly lettered in red paint: "S.R.S.D."
(_Soviet Rabotchikh Soldatskikh Deputatov_); all the guns trained
toward St. Isaac's. A barricade had been heaped up across the mouth
of Novaya Ulitza-boxes, barrels, an old bed-spring, a wagon. A pile
of lumber barred the end of the Moika quay. Short logs from a
neighbouring wood-pile were being built up along the front of the
building to form breastworks....

"Is there going to be any fighting?" I asked.

"Soon, soon," answered a soldier, nervously. "Go away, comrade,
you'll get hurt. They will come from that direction," pointing
toward the Admiralty.

"Who will?"

"That I couldn't tell you, brother," he answered, and spat.

Before the door of the Palace was a crowd of soldiers and sailors. A
sailor was telling of the end of the Council of the Russian
Republic. "We walked in there," he said, "and filled all the doors
with comrades. I went up to the counter-revolutionist Kornilovitz
who sat in the president's chair. 'No more Council,' I says. 'Run
along home now!"'                                                    |

There was laughter. By waving assorted papers I managed to get
around to the door of the press gallery. There an enormous smiling
sailor stopped me, and when I showed my pass, just said, "If you
were Saint Michael himself, comrade, you couldn't pass here!"
Through the glass of the door I made out the distorted face and
gesticulating arms of a French correspondent, locked in....

Around in front stood a little, grey-moustached man in the uniform
of a general, the centre of a knot of soldiers. He was very red in
the face.

"I am General Alexeyev," he cried. "As your superior officer and as
a member of the Council of the Republic I demand to be allowed to
pass!" The guard scratched his head, looking uneasily out of the
corner of his eye; he beckoned to an approaching officer, who grew
very agitated when he saw who it was and saluted before he realised
what he was doing.

"_Vashe Vuisokoprevoskhoditelstvo_-your High Excellency-" he
stammered, in the manner of the old régime, "Access to the Palace is
strictly forbidden--I have no right-"

An automobile came by, and I saw Gotz sitting inside, laughing
apparently with great amusement. A few minutes later another, with
armed soldiers on the front seat, full of arrested members of the
Provisional Government. Peters, Lettish member of the Military
Revolutionary Committee, came hurrying across the Square.

"I thought you bagged all those gentlemen last night," said I,
pointing to them.

"Oh," he answered, with the expression of a disappointed small boy.
"The damn fools let most of them go again before we made up our
minds...."

Down the Voskressensky Prospect a great mass of sailors were drawn
up, and behind them came marching soldiers, as far as the eye could
reach.

We went toward the Winter Palace by way of the Admiralteisky. All
the entrances to the Palace Square were closed by sentries, and a
cordon of troops stretched clear across the western end, besieged by
an uneasy throng of citizens. Except for far-away soldiers who
seemed to be carrying wood out of the Palace courtyard and piling it
in front of the main gateway, everything was quiet.

We couldn't make out whether the sentries were pro-Government or
pro-Soviet. Our papers from Smolny had no effect, however, so we
approached another part of the line with an important air and showed
our American passports, saying "Official business!" and shouldered
through. At the door of the Palace the same old _shveitzari,_ in
their brass-buttoned blue uniforms with the red-and-gold collars,
politely took our coats and hats, and we went up-stairs. In the
dark, gloomy corridor, stripped of its tapestries, a few old
attendants were lounging about, and in front of Kerensky's door a
young officer paced up and down, gnawing his moustache. We asked if
we could interview the Minister-president. He bowed and clicked his
heels.

"No, I am sorry," he replied in French. "Alexander Feodorvitch is
extremely occupied just now...." He looked at us for a moment. "In
fact, he is not here...."

"Where is he?"

"He has gone to the Front. (See App. IV, Sect. 2) And do you know,
there wasn't enough gasoline for his automobile. We had to send to
the English Hospital and borrow some."

"Are the Ministers here?"

"They are meeting in some room-I don't know where.'

"Are the Bolsheviki coming?"

"Of course. Certainly, they are coming. I expect a telephone call
every minute to say that they are coming. But we are ready. We have
_yunkers_ in the front of the Palace. Through that door there."

"Can we go in there?"

"No. Certainly not. It is not permitted." Abruptly he shook hands
all around and walked away. We turned to the forbidden door, set in
a temporary partition dividing the hall and locked on the outside.
On the other side were voices, and somebody laughing. Except for
that the vast spaces of the old Palace were silent as the grave. An
old _shveitzar_ ran up. "No, _barin,_ you must not go in there."

"Why is the door locked?"

"To keep the soldiers in," he answered. After a few minutes he said
something about having a glass of tea and went back up the hall. We
unlocked the door.

Just inside a couple of soldiers stood on guard, but they said
nothing. At the end of the corridor was a large, ornate room with
gilded cornices and enormous crystal lustres, and beyond it several
smaller ones, wainscoted with dark wood. On both sides of the
parquetted floor lay rows of dirty mattresses and blankets, upon
which occasional soldiers were stretched out; everywhere was a
litter of cigarette-butts, bits of bread, cloth, and empty bottles
with expensive French labels. More and more soldiers, with the red
shoulder-straps of the _yunker_-schools, moved about in a stale
atmosphere of tobacco-smoke and unwashed humanity. One had a bottle
of white Burgundy, evidently filched from the cellars of the Palace.
They looked at us with astonishment as we marched past, through room
after room, until at last we came out into a series of great
state-salons, fronting their long and dirty windows on the Square.
The walls were covered with huge canvases in massive gilt
frames-historical battle-scenes.... "12 October 1812" and "6 November
1812" and "16/28 August 1813." ... One had a gash across the upper
right hand corner.

The place was all a huge barrack, and evidently had been for weeks,
from the look of the floor and walls. Machine guns were mounted on
window-sills, rifles stacked between the mattresses.

As we were looking at the pictures an alcoholic breath assailed me
from the region of my left ear, and a voice said in thick but fluent
French, "I see, by the way you admire the paintings, that you are
foreigners." He was a short, puffy man with a baldish head as he
removed his cap.

"Americans? Enchanted. I am Stabs-Capitan Vladimir Artzibashev,
absolutely at your service." It did not seem to occur to him that
there was anything unusual in four strangers, one a woman, wandering
through the defences of an army awaiting attack. He began to
complain of the state of Russia.

"Not only these Bolsheviki," he said, "but the fine traditions of
the Russian army are broken down. Look around you. These are all
students in the officers' training schools. But are they gentlemen?
Kerensky opened the officers' schools to the ranks, to any soldier
who could pass an examination. Naturally there are many, many who
are contaminated by the Revolution...."

Without consequence he changed the subject. "I am very anxious to go
away from Russia. I have made up my mind to join the American army.
Will you please go to your Consul and make arrangements? I will give
you my address." In spite of our protestations he wrote it on a
piece of paper, and seemed to feel better at once. I have it
still-"_Oranien-baumskaya Shkola Praporshtchikov 2nd, Staraya
Peterhof._"

"We had a review this morning early," he went on, as he guided us
through the rooms and explained everything. "The Women's Battalion
decided to remain loyal to the Government."

"Are the women soldiers in the Palace?"

"Yes, they are in the back rooms, where they won't be hurt if any
trouble comes." He sighed. "It is a great responsibility," said he.

For a while we stood at the window, looking down on the Square
before the Palace, where three companies of long-coated _yunkers_
were drawn up under arms, being harangued by a tall,
energetic-looking officer I recognised as Stankievitch, chief
Military Commissar of the Provisional Government. After a few
minutes two of the companies shouldered arms with a clash, barked
three sharp shouts, and went swinging off across the Square,
disappearing through the Red Arch into the quiet city.

"They are going to capture the Telephone Exchange," said some one.
Three cadets stood by us, and we fell into conversation. They said
they had entered the schools from the ranks, and gave their
names-Robert Olev, Alexei Vasilienko and Erni Sachs, an Esthonian.
But now they didn't want to be officers any more, because officers
were very unpopular. They didn't seem to know what to do, as a
matter of fact, and it was plain that they were not happy.

But soon they began to boast. "If the Bolsheviki come we shall show
them how to fight. They do not dare to fight, they are cowards. But
if we should be overpowered, well, every man keeps one bullet for
himself...."

At this point there was a burst of rifle-fire not far off. Out on
the Square all the people began to run, falling flat on their faces,
and the _izvoshtchiki,_ standing on the corners, galloped in every
direction. Inside all was uproar, soldiers running here and there,
grabbing up guns, rifle-belts and shouting, "Here they come! Here
they come!" ... But in a few minutes it quieted down again. The
_izvoshtchiki_ came back, the people lying down stood up. Through
the Red Arch appeared the _yunkers,_ marching a little out of step,
one of them supported by two comrades.

It was getting late when we left the Palace. The sentries in the
Square had all disappeared. The great semi-circle of Government
buildings seemed deserted. We went into the Hotel France for dinner,
and right in the middle of soup the waiter, very pale in the face,
came up and insisted that we move to the main dining-room at the
back of the house, because they were going to put out the lights in
the café. "There will be much shooting," he said.

When we came out on the Morskaya again it was quite dark, except for
one flickering street-light on the corner of the Nevsky. Under this
stood a big armored automobile, with racing engine and oil-smoke
pouring out of it. A small boy had climbed up the side of the thing
and was looking down the barrel of a machine gun. Soldiers and
sailors stood around, evidently waiting for something. We walked
back up to the Red Arch, where a knot of soldiers was gathered
staring at the brightly-lighted Winter Palace and talking in loud
tones.

"No, comrades," one was saying. "How can we shoot at them? The
Women's Battalion is in there-they will say we have fired on Russian
women."

As we reached the Nevsky again another armoured car came around the
corner, and a man poked his head out of the turret-top.

"Come on!" he yelled. "Let's go on through and attack!"

The driver of the other car came over, and shouted so as to be heard
above the roaring engine. "The Committee says to wait. They have got
artillery behind the wood-piles in there...."

Here the street-cars had stopped running, few people passed, and
there were no lights; but a few blocks away we could see the trams,
the crowds, the lighted shop-windows and the electric signs of the
moving-picture shows-life going on as usual. We had tickets to the
Ballet at the Marinsky Theatre-all theatres were open-but it was too
exciting out of doors....

In the darkness we stumbled over lumber-piles barricading the Police
Bridge, and before the Stroganov Palace made out some soldiers
wheeling into position a three-inch field-gun. Men in various
uniforms were coming and going in an aimless way, and doing a great
deal of talking....

Up the Nevsky the whole city seemed to be out promenading. On every
corner immense crowds were massed around a core of hot discussion.
Pickets of a dozen soldiers with fixed bayonets lounged at the
street-crossings, red-faced old men in rich fur coats shook their
fists at them, smartly-dressed women screamed epithets; the soldiers
argued feebly, with embarrassed grins.... Armoured cars went up and
down the street, named after the first Tsars-Oleg, Rurik,
Svietoslav-and daubed with huge red letters, "R. S. D. R. P."
_(Rossiskaya Partia_) [*]. At the Mikhailovsky a man appeared with an
[* (Russian Social Democratic Labor Party).]
armful of newspapers, and was immediately stormed by frantic people,
offering a rouble, five roubles, ten roubles, tearing at each other
like animals. It was _Rabotchi i Soldat,_ announcing the victory of
the Proletarian Revolution, the liberation of the Bolsheviki still
in prison, calling upon the Army front and rear for support... a
feverish little sheet of four pages, running to enormous type,
containing no news....

On the corner of the Sadovaya about two thousand citizens had
gathered, staring up at the roof of a tall building, where a tiny
red spark glowed and waned.

"See!" said a tall peasant, pointing to it. "It is a provocator.
Presently he will fire on the people...." Apparently no one thought of
going to investigate.

The massive facade of Smolny blazed with lights as we drove up, and
from every street converged upon it streams of hurrying shapes dim
in the gloom. Automobiles and motorcycles came and went; an enormous
elephant-coloured armoured automobile, with two red flags flying
from the turret, lumbered out with screaming siren. It was cold, and
at the outer gate the Red Guards had built themselves a bon-fire. At
the inner gate, too, there was a blaze, by the light of which the
sentries slowly spelled out our passes and looked us up and down.
The canvas covers had been taken off the four rapid-fire guns on
each side of the doorway, and the ammunition-belts hung snakelike
from their breeches. A dun herd of armoured cars stood under the
trees in the court-yard, engines going. The long, bare,
dimly-illuminated halls roared with the thunder of feet, calling,
shouting.... There was an atmosphere of recklessness. A crowd came
pouring down the staircase, workers in black blouses and round black
fur hats, many of them with guns slung over their shoulders,
soldiers in rough dirt-coloured coats and grey fur _shapki_ pinched
flat, a leader or so-Lunatcharsky, Kameniev-hurrying along in the
centre of a group all talking at once, with harassed anxious faces,
and bulging portfolios under their arms. The extraordinary meeting
of the Petrograd Soviet was over. I stopped Kameniev-a quick moving
little man, with a wide, vivacious face set close to his shoulders.
Without preface he read in rapid French a copy of the resolution
just passed:

The Petrograd Soviet of Workers' and Soldiers' Deputies, saluting
the victorious Revolution of the Petrograd proletariat and garrison,
particularly emphasises the unity, organisation, discipline, and
complete cooperation shown by the masses in this rising; rarely has
less blood been spilled, and rarely has an insurrection succeeded so
well.

The Soviet expresses its firm conviction that the Workers' and
Peasants' Government which, as the government of the Soviets, will
be created by the Revolution, and which will assure the industrial
proletariat of the support of the entire mass of poor peasants, will
march firmly toward Socialism, the only means by which the country
can be spared the miseries and unheard-of horrors of war.

The new Workers' and Peasants' Government will propose immediately a
just and democratic peace to all the belligerent countries.

It will suppress immediately the great landed property, and transfer
the land to the peasants. It will establish workmen's control over
production and distribution of manufactured products, and will set
up a general control over the banks, which it will transform into a
state monopoly.

The Petrograd Soviet of Workers' and Soldiers' Deputies calls upon
the workers and the peasants of Russia to support with all their
energy and all their devotion the Proletarian Revolution. The Soviet
expresses its conviction that the city workers, allies of the poor
peasants, will assure complete revolutionary order, indispensable to
the victory of Socialism. The Soviet is convinced that the
proletariat of the countries of Western Europe will aid us in
conducting the cause of Socialism to a real and lasting victory.

"You consider it won then?"

He lifted his shoulders. "There is much to do. Horribly much. It is
just beginning....

On the landing I met Riazanov, vice-president of the Trade Unions,
looking black and biting his grey beard. "It's insane! Insane!" he
shouted. "The European working-class won't move! All Russia-" He
waved his hand distractedly and ran off. Riazanov and Kameniev had
both opposed the insurrection, and felt the lash of Lenin's terrible
tongue....

It had been a momentous session. In the name of the Military
Revolutionary Committee Trotzky had declared that the Provisional
Government no longer existed.

"The characteristic of bourgeois governments," he said, "is to
deceive the people. We, the Soviets of Workers', Soldiers' and
Peasants' Deputies, are going to try an experiment unique in
history; we are going to found a power which will have no other aim
but to satisfy the needs of the soldiers, workers, and peasants."

Lenin had appeared, welcomed with a mighty ovation, prophesying
world-wide Social Revolution.... And Zinoviev, crying, "This day we
have paid our debt to the international proletariat, and struck a
terrible blow at the war, a terrible body-blow at all the
imperialists and particularly at Wilhelm the Executioner....

Then Trotzky, that telegrams had been sent to the front announcing
the victorious insurrection, but no reply had come. Troops were said
to be marching against Petrograd-a delegation must be sent to tell
them the truth.

Cries, "You are anticipating the will of the All-Russian Congress of
Soviets!"

Trotzky, coldly, "The will of the All-Russian Congress of Soviets
has been anticipated by the rising of the Petrograd workers and
soldiers!"

So we came into the great meeting-hall, pushing through the
clamorous mob at the door. In the rows of seats, under the white
chandeliers, packed immovably in the aisles and on the sides,
perched on every window-sill, and even the edge of the platform, the
representatives of the workers and soldiers of all Russia waited in
anxious silence or wild exultation the ringing of the chairman's
bell. There was no heat in the hall but the stifling heat of
unwashed human bodies. A foul blue cloud of cigarette smoke rose
from the mass and hung in the thick air. Occasionally some one in
authority mounted the tribune and asked the comrades not to smoke;
then everybody, smokers and all, took up the cry "Don't smoke,
comrades!" and went on smoking. Petrovsky, Anarchist delegate from
the Obukhov factory, made a seat for me beside him. Unshaven and
filthy, he was reeling from three nights' sleepless work on the
Military Revolutionary Committee.

On the platform sat the leaders of the old _Tsay-ee-kah_-for the
last time dominating the turbulent Soviets, which they had ruled
from the first days, and which were now risen against them. It was
the end of the first period of the Russian revolution, which these
men had attempted to guide in careful ways.... The three greatest of
them were not there: Kerensky, flying to the front through country
towns all doubtfully heaving up; Tcheidze, the old eagle, who had
contemptuously retired to his own Georgian mountains, there to
sicken with consumption; and the high-souled Tseretelli, also
mortally stricken, who, nevertheless, would return and pour out his
beautiful eloquence for a lost cause. Gotz sat there, Dan, Lieber,
Bogdanov, Broido, Fillipovsky,-white-faced, hollow-eyed and
indignant. Below them the second _siezd_ of the All-Russian Soviets
boiled and swirled, and over their heads the Military Revolutionary
Committee functioned white-hot, holding in its hands the threads of
insurrection and striking with a long arm.... It was 10.40 P. M.

Dan, a mild-faced, baldish figure in a shapeless military surgeon's
uniform, was ringing the bell. Silence fell sharply, intense, broken
by the scuffling and disputing of the people at the door....

"We have the power in our hands," he began sadly, stopped for a
moment, and then went on in a low voice. "Comrades! The Congress of
Soviets in meeting in such unusual circumstances and in such an
extraordinary moment that you will understand why the _Tsay-ee-kah_
considers it unnecessary to address you with a political speech.
This will become much clearer to you if you will recollect that I am
a member of the _Tsay-ee-kah,_ and that at this very moment our
party comrades are in the Winter Palace under bombardment,
sacrificing themselves to execute the duty put on them by the
_Tsay-ee-kah."_ (Confused uproar.)

"I declare the first session of the Second Congress of Soviets of
Workers' and Soldiers' Deputies open!"

The election of the presidium took place amid stir and moving about.
Avanessov announced that by agreement of the Bolsheviki, Left
Socialist Revolutionaries and Mensheviki Internationalists, it was
decided to base the presidium upon proportionality. Several
Mensheviki leaped to their feet protesting. A bearded soldier
shouted at them, "Remember what you did to us Bolsheviki when _we_
were the minority!" Result-14 Bolsheviki, 7 Socialist
Revolutionaries, 3 Mensheviki and 1 Internationalist (Gorky's
group). Hendelmann, for the right and centre Socialist
Revolutionaries, said that they refused to take part in the
presidium; the same from Kintchuk, for the Mensheviki; and from the
Mensheviki Internationalists, that until the verification of certain
circumstances, they too could not enter the presidium. Scattering
applause and hoots. One voice, "Renegades, you call yourselves
Socialists!" A representative of the Ukrainean delegates demanded,
and received, a place. Then the old _Tsay-ee-kah_ stepped down, and
in their places appeared Trotzky, Kameniev, Lunatcharsky, Madame
Kollentai, Nogin.... The hall rose, thundering. How far they had
soared, these Bolsheviki, from a despised and hunted sect less than
four months ago, to this supreme place, the helm of great Russia in
full tide of insurrection!

The order of the day, said Kameniev, was first, Organisation of
Power; second, War and Peace; and third, the Constituent Assembly.
Lozovsky, rising, announced that upon agreement of the bureau of all
factions, it was proposed to hear and discuss the report of the
Petrograd Soviet, then to give the floor to members of the
_Tsay-ee-kah_ and the different parties, and finally to pass to the
order of the day.

But suddenly a new sound made itself heard, deeper than the tumult
of the crowd, persistent, disquieting,-the dull shock of guns.
People looked anxiously toward the clouded windows, and a sort of
fever came over them. Martov, demanding the floor, croaked hoarsely,
"The civil war is beginning, comrades! The first question must be a
peaceful settlement of the crisis. On principle and from a political
standpoint we must urgently discuss a means of averting civil war.
Our brothers are being shot down in the streets! At this moment,
when before the opening of the Congress of Soviets the question of
Power is being settled by means of a military plot organised by one
of the revolutionary parties-" for a moment he could not make
himself heard above the noise, "All of the revolutionary parties
must face the fact! The first _vopros_ (question) before the
Congress is the question of Power, and this question is already
being settled by force of arms in the streets!... We must create a
power which will be recognised by the whole democracy. If the
Congress wishes to be the voice of the revolutionary democracy it
must not sit with folded hands before the developing civil war, the
result of which may be a dangerous outburst of counter-revolution....
The possibility of a peaceful outcome lies in the formation of a
united democratic authority.... We must elect a delegation to
negotiate with the other Socialist parties and organisation....

Always the methodical muffled boom of cannon through the windows,
and the delegates, screaming at each other.... So, with the crash of
artillery, in the dark, with hatred, and fear, and reckless daring,
new Russia was being born.

The Left Socialist Revolutionaries and the United Social Democrats
supported Martov's proposition. It was accepted. A soldier announced
that the All-Russian Peasants' Soviets had refused to send delegates
to the Congress; he proposed that a committee be sent with a formal
invitation. "Some delegates are present," he said. "I move that they
be given votes." Accepted.

Kharash, wearing the epaulets of a captain, passionately demanded
the floor. "The political hypocrites who control this Congress," he
shouted, "told us we were to settle the question of Power-and it is
being settled behind our backs, before the Congress opens! Blows are
being struck against the Winter Palace, and it is by such blows that
the nails are being driven into the coffin of the political party
which has risked such an adventure!" Uproar. Followed him Gharra:
"While we are here discussing propositions of peace, there is a
battle on in the streets.... The Socialist Revolutionaries and the
Mensheviki refuse to be involved in what is happening, and call upon
all public forces to resist the attempt to capture the power...."
Kutchin, delegate of the 12th Army and representative of the
Troudoviki: "I was sent here only for information, and I am
returning at once to the Front, where all the Army Committees
consider that the taking of power by the Soviets, only three weeks
before the Constituent Assembly, is a stab in the back of the Army
and a crime against the people-!" Shouts of "Lie! You lie!"... When he
could be heard again, "Let's make an end of this adventure in
Petrograd! I call upon all delegates to leave this hall in order to
save the country and the Revolution!" As he went down the aisle in
the midst of a deafening noise, people surged in upon him,
threatening.... Then Khintchuk, an officer with a long brown goatee,
speaking suavely and persuasively: "I speak for the delegates from
the Front. The Army is imperfectly represented in this Congress, and
furthermore, the Army does not consider the Congress of Soviets
necessary at this time, only three weeks before the opening of the
Constituent-" shouts and stamping, always growing more violent. "The
Army does not consider that the Congress of Soviets has the
necessary authority-" Soldiers began to stand up all over the hall.

"Who are you speaking for? What do you represent?" they cried.

"The Central Executive Committee of the Soviet of the Fifth Army,
the Second F- regiment, the First N- Regiment, the Third S- Rifles...."

"When were you elected? You represent the officers, not the
soldiers! What do the soldiers say about it?" Jeers and hoots.

"We, the Front group, disclaim all responsibility for what has
happened and is happening, and we consider it necessary to mobilise
all self-conscious revolutionary forces for the salvation of the
Revolution! The Front group will leave the Congress.... The place to
fight is out on the streets!"

Immense bawling outcry. "You speak for the Staff-not for the Army!"

"I appeal to all reasonable soldiers to leave this Congress!"

"Kornilovitz! Counter-revolutionist! Provocator!" were hurled at him.

On behalf of the Mensheviki, Khintchuk then announced that the only
possibility of a peaceful solution was to begin negotiations with
the Provisional Government for the formation of a new Cabinet, which
would find support in all strata of society. He could not proceed
for several minutes. Raising his voice to a shout he read the
Menshevik declaration:

"Because the Bolsheviki have made a military conspiracy with the aid
of the Petrograd Soviet, without consulting the other factions and
parties, we find it impossible to remain in the Congress, and
therefore withdraw, inviting the other groups to follow us and to
meet for discussion of the situation!"

"Deserter!" At intervals in the almost continuous disturbance
Hendelman, for the Socialist Revolutionaries, could be heard
protesting against the bombardment of the Winter Palace.... "We are
opposed to this kind of anarchy...."

Scarcely had he stepped down than a young, lean-faced soldier, with
flashing eyes, leaped to the platform, and dramatically lifted his
hand:

"Comrades!" he cried and there was a hush. "My _familia_ (name) is
Peterson-I speak for the Second Lettish Rifles. You have heard the
statements of two representatives of the Army committees; these
statements would have some value _if their authors had been
representatives of the Army_-" Wild applause. _"But they do not
represent the soldiers!"_ Shaking his fist. "The Twelfth Army has
been insisting for a long time upon the re-election of the Great
Soviet and the Army Committee, but just as your own _Tsay-ee-kah,_
our Committee refused to call a meeting of the representatives of
the masses until the end of September, so that the reactionaries
could elect their own false delegates to this Congress. I tell you
now, the Lettish soldiers have many times said, 'No more
resolutions! No more talk! We want deeds-the Power must be in our
hands!' Let these impostor delegates leave the Congress! The Army is
not with them!"

The hall rocked with cheering. In the first moments of the session,
stunned by the rapidity of events, startled by the sound of cannon,
the delegates had hesitated. For an hour hammer-blow after
hammer-blow had fallen from that tribune, welding them together but
beating them down. Did they stand then alone? Was Russia rising
against them? Was it true that the Army was marching on Petrograd?
Then this clear-eyed young soldier had spoken, and in a flash they
knew it for the truth.... _This_ was the voice of the soldiers-the
stirring millions of uniformed workers and peasants were men like
them, and their thoughts and feelings were the same...

More soldiers ... Gzhelshakh; for the Front delegates, announcing that
they had only decided to leave the Congress by a small majority, and
that _the Bolshevik members had not even taken part in the vote,_ as
they stood for division according to political parties, and not